Um, I called this meeting
of the South Portland City Council to order at
six minutes after five on Tuesday, January 20th.
Do we have a motion to go into executive session move?
So moved by Counselor Coleman, do we have a second?
Councilor Walker. Thank you very much. All approve.
That is a quorum. Thank you.
We'll be moving into executive session.
I am calling this meeting of the South Portland City Council
to order on Tuesday, January 20, 20, 26.
Please join me if you wish to.
In pledging allegiance to the Republic
that is the United States, I pledge
Allegiance to the flag of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, invisible with Liberty,
Liberty and justice.
Thank you, Madam City Clerk.
May we have a roll call, please?
Counselor Coleman. Here. Counselor Matthews.
Counselor Pride. Here. Counselor Scott? Here.
Counselor Tipton.
Here. Counselor Walker here. And Counselor West here.
Thank you. Um, counselor Matthews wishes he could be
with us, but, um, an,
an unexpected circumstance has developed
and he cannot join the meeting tonight.
Are there any additions or corrections to our minutes?
Seeing none if there's no objection, we're going
to pass the minutes by unanimous consent.
Thank you. And that takes us to the petitions
and communications section of our meeting tonight.
The first item we have is just an update for the council
as well as the public, that
during a workshop on the comprehensive plan,
we received an informal petition
to protect the working waterfront.
And we just did, wanted to report on the number
of signatures that we received for this, as well as those
that were validated versus
invalidated by the clerk's office.
Uh, we did receive over 2,597 signatures on this petition.
2,163 were validated
and 434 were invalidated.
As I mentioned, this was not a formal petition
for a citizen initiative,
but we did feel that there was value in notifying everyone
of the outcome because the percentage of voters
that are required on a citizen initiative was met if this
were to be a petition that is brought forth later.
Thank you. And then are,
are we hearing?
Yep. Next up we have a presentation from our Economic
Development Director, brief presentation, uh, Leah Duffy,
uh, about the, uh, upcoming Business Awards.
Thank you. Can you
To me?
That Would help, wouldn't it?
Good evening. Um, I'm Leah Duffy,
economic Development Director
and we're just going to do, um, a readout, an announcement
of our 2025 Business Award winners.
Um, this went out in, uh, social media
and the press last week, um,
but we wanted to make sure to rec recognize these
businesses in front of the council.
So we're very pleased to present the business of the year,
which is 25 or more employees as Taj Indian Cuisine.
The maker of the year is Seabird Aromatics,
right down here in Ville, small Business of the Year.
Barbara Brothers Meet and Provisions.
Sam d Pietro Community Impact Award is the locker project.
Business Leader of the year is Wade Merritt,
who is president of the Maine International Trade
Commission, as well as on the DECD
Economic Development International,
and a very proud resident o SoPo for the last 17 years.
And we have the Sustainable Business of the Year,
dancing Harvest Farm, our local CSA
and the new business of the year is Second Rodeo Coffee.
Also like to just put a shout out for people to RSVP
to the award ceremony.
It is a really delightful evening.
We will host it at South Portland High School.
It is Wednesday, February 25th.
We invite everybody for an hour social at four 30.
We're gonna have some fabulous catering.
Um, bread and butter.
Uh, local business here is gonna do some hot bites.
We've got Street Witch doing tea and coffee,
and then Asian House is doing some fabulous mocktails.
So it'll be a really fun hour.
And then we will go into five 30 to seven 30
with the presentation of the awards.
You can RSVP by, uh, copying the link
that you see on your screens at home
or going to, uh, the, the city website
and visiting the economic development page
and the Business awards.
Thank you. Thank you so much Leanne,
and thanks for your work.
I'm sure we're all excited about the business awards
without objection.
We will vote to postpone the appointment count, uh,
excuse me, calendar until our next meeting on February 3rd.
No objection to that.
Um, and next we'll move to our consent calendar, but
before we do, we'll ask the city clerk to read the rules
for public comment.
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic,
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on an item appearing on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until this item comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you're unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion Part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again. Similarly, members of the public
who speak on the topic when it comes up on the agenda,
may not speak about the topic during citizen discussion.
Part two, for the speakers, we ask
that you please state your name and address for the record.
Thank you very much. And I will add
that this evening's meeting is a hybrid meeting,
so we'll also be able to hear public comment, um, virtually.
And when you are making comment either in person
or virtually, um, I believe virtually you're able
to see our timer. Yes.
Uh, I don't think they can see the,
um, they might be able to.
Yeah, they usually don't display.
That's usually displayed up on the message board there.
Alright, well, to anyone making comment
or planning to virtually, um, you may
or may not be able to see your time being recorded,
but you will hear from the city clerk a reminder when you
have 30 seconds left in your three minute public comment.
Um, so that should be helpful to you.
Now, Madam Clerk, will you please read the items
on the consent calendar
Order, 7 1 25 26 Mahoney City Center Committee,
Maryanne Brown for appointment in district one
to fill the vacancy order.
1 0 4 25 26 Mahoney City Center Committee
for Michelle Sullivan for District five
to fill the vacancy order.
1 20 25 26 for Human Rights Commission for Pedro Vasquez
for the at large seat for a term unexpired term
that expires on October 6th, 2026.
Order 1 21 25 26 for Human Rights Commission
for Jocelyn Layton Co for district three
for an unexpired term that expires on October 5th, 2027.
Order 1 22 25 26 moving the March 17th 26 meeting
of the city council to March 19th.
And lastly, order number 1 23 25 26 authorizing an agreement
with the main Department of Transportation
for construction permit
for an existing paving resurface project.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Thank you very much. Um,
I just wonder if I should mention why we would
move the council meeting.
I think I will. That would be in order to allow one
or more counselors to attend, um, what is known
as Capitol Hill Day in Washington, in which representatives
of Maine municipalities, um, make visits to Capitol Hill
to talk with our delegation, um,
to Congress.
And um, also concurrently there is the National League
of Cities Conference in Washington,
DC which is an opportunity for counselors
to meet our peers across the country
and to, well, to learn things, come back to South Portland
with ideas and information.
Alright, is there any counselor who wants
to remove an item from the consent calendar?
Alright, I don't see any.
And is there any member of the public who would like
to make a comment on anything on the consent calendar?
Do we have anyone here living and seated?
I don't see anyone. Do we have anyone online?
I don't see any hands online item on a
consent calendar only.
Okay. Well, what is the wish of the council
Move for passage?
Thank you Counselor Coleman moves for passage.
Do we have a second? I'll second. Counselor Pride.
Thank you very much. All in favor? It is unanimous.
Thank you very much, counselors.
And also thank you very much to those who have, um,
put their names in to serve on committees.
We're grateful to you, we congratulate you. We need you.
Thank you very much.
Alright, Now it's time
for our first public comment session.
For items on the agenda
or off the agenda, if you have a comment about an item
that is on the agenda, probably best for you to wait until
that item comes up.
You will have an opportunity to make comment.
Do we see anyone here?
Alright, well please approach the podium.
Thank you very much. State your name,
the street you live on.
Maryanne Brown. Let's hear from you.
Preble Street in South Portland.
And I just wanna say thank you for the appointment
to the Mahoney committee.
I'm excited to give back to this fine city
that I call home. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Yep. Well, we have
Mayor, members of council.
My name is Tim Honey. I live at 2 1 5 High
Street in South Portland.
And, um, I'm here on behalf of Toss the Tanks.
Um, and I want to share some thoughts
with you tonight about where we're going.
Uh, we're convinced, um, that Suncor must be persuaded
to meet with the city and explore, um,
what a win-win solution could look like
and that this is really important that the city
and Suncor come together.
The background on this is that for
over 80 years south Portland has borne the environmental
safety and land use burden of hosting the Portland Montreal
Pipeline and the Hill Street Tank Farm during World War ii.
And for decades afterwards, this infrastructure was critical
to Canada's energy security, allowing crude oil
to reach Montreal area refineries when other routes were
unsafe and unavailable.
The economic benefits of this system
flowed largely to Canada.
While South Portland accepted significant land use
constraints, environmental risk, and long-term uncertainty.
In 2020, Suncor became the sole owner of the pipeline
and of the Hill Street Tank Farm,
and today they're operating at 3% capacity.
As a result, Suncor rarely acknowledges, um, the,
the, the site that we're talking about, um, publicly at all.
Um, despite this minimum use, the city continues
to face ongoing environmental risks, visual blight,
and the loss of substantial property tax revenues
that could be generated through
the productive redevelopment.
Suncor is a very large corporation.
They had their best year ever in 2026.
They claim that they delivered a hundred billion dollars
of value to the shareholders.
And our question for Suncor is
that if Sun Suncor can deliver record returns,
why can't it not engage with its host community
to resolve the future of a nearly idle high risk facility
to a mutually beneficial outcome?
The opportunities for the city are enormous.
Imagine the opportunities in the hill.
Um, the Hill Street Tank Farm, um, can,
if it can be developed
and the city does not have to pay, they have to use any
taxpayer's dollars for the redevelopment of
that site in the Hill Street.
If the Hill Street Tank Farm was redeveloped
with a thousand units, those units would generate
$4 million a year, a thousand units seconds.
And that's a 30 seconds conservative in 30 seconds. Yeah.
Um, um, estimate this 4 million is more than double the
taxes that are brought in by the main mall.
The next step, Suncor
and the city must meet to discuss goals, constraints,
and potential pathways wa pa pathways forward.
And we urge you to send a letter to the CEO up there
and request that such a discussion get
underway. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Honey, is there anyone who'd like, yes,
please come to the podium
Counselors Jeff Steinberg Cottage Road to speak
of immigration for just three minutes, which is what I mean
to do hardly seems enough at a time like this.
So I invite each of you
to consider saying something about immigration at some point
in this meeting tonight,
I'm again invoking my immigrant grandmother
and giving her a name.
This time Rose
Presser and reminding you
that she was a mean spirited old lady
who grew her own horse radish,
spoke in a heavy enjoyment accent, had little use
for the color yellow or any of the four women
who married her four sons.
My grandmother was an immigrant. And so, so am I.
But for the intervention of just a single generation.
And so was almost everybody in my extended family,
the McCarthy's, the O'Brien, the Kennedys, the martinis,
the esis, the Wei Meyers, the Smokos.
When I was in seventh or eighth grade,
I got a dinky little award from the Daughters
of the American Revolution.
And I remember thinking even then, I'm no more a daughter
of the American Revolution than I'm the daughter
of Richard Millhouse Nixon.
I am much closer to being an immigrant.
And so are almost all of us.
We're almost all from away, even the Daughters
of the American Revolution.
Being here for a few generations doesn't mean you own the
place any more than the rest of us do.
I learned that in seventh grade,
which is maybe why I got the Dinky Award.
Our immigrant neighbors here in South
Portland own the place too.
Those who are citizens
and those who are on their way
to becoming citizens deserve their chance at
earning ownership.
What they don't deserve is ice at their door.
Rose presser would've had none of that.
She would've had ice in her veins meeting ice.
She'd have been ready. We can be ready too.
Here's one important way.
If ice comes to your door, if ice comes to your door,
don't open it.
They need a judicial warrant in order to enter your home
or any private space.
If they say they have a warrant,
make them slide it under the door or show it at a window.
It is almost certain not to be a judicial warrant.
Judicial warrants are signed by a judge.
What they will show you instead is an
administrative warrant.
Administrative warrants are issued
by agencies like ICE itself.
Do not bear a judge's signature, have no legal power
to make you open that door.
Ice agents have a long history of lying about that,
but you should not give any more than
Rose presser would have.
What you can do is call our own South Portland police,
who are real police officers, unlike ice agents
and who have their own history of applying the law fairly
and of standing with
and for the people of South Portland against bullies
and thugs and con men.
Today, some South Portland kids stayed home from school
because of this bullying.
The rest of us South Portlanders should understand
that when ice comes to the doors of our neighbors,
they are coming to our doors too.
Time that the neighbors they pursue
and harass are we insist like family to us,
and that no matter when we got here, we are all each
of us immigrants.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Steinbrink. Your comments are appreciated.
Anyone else, please come to the microphone.
Uh, Rosemary D'Angelo Pleasantdale,
I'm gonna encourage you to not ask
people to give their address.
People are don't feel comfortable giving their address.
They should just have to give either their
neighborhood or their city.
Um, good evening.
And I'm here tonight for two issues that are related.
First, the South Portland School Board has postponed
its public community budget forum.
It was originally scheduled for this Thursday,
January 22nd at 6:00 PM Given the fear, the tension
and anxiety in the community,
the school board felt it was not responsible
to continue with this date.
The forum has been postponed to Wednesday,
February 4th at 6:00 PM I'm not sure of the location yet.
I'm not sure things are going to be any better at
that point, but we're going to postpone it.
The second topic relates to the reason for our postponement
and relates to what Mr.
Brink Hoff just said with Mr. Steinbrink.
There is reason to believe that immigration
and customs enforcement right as we speak, is in the
Red Bank Brick Hill area.
I cannot confirm this.
What I can confirm are the calls I've received,
the fear I've heard, the terror I have witnessed.
This is not okay. Those of us who look
and sound like I do
may be exempt from these feelings,
but we have an obligation to care for one another.
Sexual orientation is not a choice.
Skin color is not a choice. Ethnicity is not a choice.
Country of origin is not a choice.
Please look out
for not just your friends, but your neighbors.
Those you know, and those you don't yet know.
Help your neighbors develop a plan
and especially a plan for their children.
Reach out, offer help and ask, what can I do?
Because there's always something, something you can do.
We offer a chance to speak
to all residents here at our public meetings.
Some are fearful today.
So it's time that we use our voice,
our action, our privilege.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your comments.
Is there anyone else here who would like
to make a comment, public comment?
Do we have anyone online who would like to do that?
Not seeing any hands. I, I to speak.
Okay. Guess we have someone on there that wants to speak.
Could you please give us your Hi, this is
Pedro. Your
name. Well, here it comes. Thank you.
Good evening. This is Pedro.
I am, um, not with you tonight
because I'm out at the high school supporting our state
champ girls basketball team, of which my kid is on the team.
I, uh, am following up on Rose Marie's
and Jeff's, uh, comment about ice
and about what's happening in our community.
We do know that they were there at scrub dump,
car wash in the Red Bank neighborhood today.
We also know that they were at the laundromat in
the Red Bank neighborhood.
And that is confirmed.
I've seen cell phone video from folks who I, uh,
believe are credible.
And there are people in this community
who are very fearful tonight.
There are kids who are missing school.
There are people who are at work.
There are people who are missing important court dates
because they are refrained that ice is going to swoop down
and make them disappear.
And so these are our neighbors.
These are people that we know, um,
and they deserve the best of South Portland.
Have to offer just like the rest of us do.
Uh, you know, I have to share with you that, uh,
many folks in the community are carrying their papers.
Uh, myself included, I'm not carrying my passport
and my birth certificate because we know this is
not about immigration.
It's about something much, much deeper
and much, much more insidious.
And so I'm asking city council
and our government as our representatives to take a stand
and do something.
Do something tangible. Do something that shows the response
and your willingness to protect our top Portland resident.
And I'd like to just code this question.
What if ICE detained one of us?
Uh, and we call 9 1 1. Will our first responders come in?
Support of and defendant. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Mr. Vasquez.
Is there anyone else online?
Anyone else online who would like to make a public comment?
That's the only one online.
Alright, if we have no other public comments,
public comment is closed.
I think I heard at least one question, Mr. City Manager.
So, uh, folks are, uh, more than welcome to call the, um,
police department if, um, there's an event going on
that involves ICE or otherwise.
Um, the police's role isn't to stop ice from,
from doing what their work is.
If there's a lawful action, uh, that they witness, uh,
they're, they're not gonna step in
and stop it from happening.
If they see illegal activity occurring on either side, uh,
there's the potential that they
could step in, but they're not.
Um, their job is not to interfere with, uh, ICE's activities
or any other, uh, activities that they see, um,
that are legally occurring.
I don't know if Chief or Kevin wanna expand on that any,
but I think I covered it.
Hi, Dan. Police chief.
I wasn't prepared to, uh, make remarks tonight,
but everyone is
on edge in our community.
Everyone is nervous. Uh, we have information that
federal law enforcement agents are here performing their
job function as they see it.
As the city manager said, we will, if called upon to answer
Pedro's question, respond
and we will enforce the law.
There's been much made about
ICE agents breaking the law.
We have a duty to act if we see
law enforce law enforcement officers breaking the law.
If we are at a scene
and our officers that we work with are
using excessive force, we have a duty
to act and we will do so.
Whether that's a federal law enforcement agent
or our own police officers,
that is clear in the law duty to act.
We don't enforce per your proclamation and,
and your clear orders, uh, immigration status,
offenses, laws of that nature.
That's not our role. Our role here is public safety.
It is to safeguard our community and those in it everyone.
And that includes ice agents that are performing their job.
If you, our community, our members, our
neighbors, uh, take matters into their own hands
and they do not protest peacefully.
And they get, They engage in, in, um,
in activity and conduct that is going to disrupt
the agents from doing their jobs.
They could be committing crimes and we will enforce the law.
We do. Uh, we are, uh, as concerned.
I'm an as concerned for our officers as we all are for our
neighbors and our people in our community.
It is a very, very difficult situation
for all of us to be in.
We, we share your concern.
These are the people that we work with.
Uh, we go to school with our kids.
Go to school with your kids that are in these schools.
Um, I just caution everyone tonight
cars followed the Cape Elizabeth Police Chief Home.
He's in a unmarked black SUV
and they followed him home.
I ask you, what were they gonna do when they got there?
It's very, very dangerous to do these kinds of things.
I please, please implore you not to do that.
Let us do our job. Call us. But don't get involved in this.
Don't put yourself in between ice agents
and our our neighbors.
Don't do it. It's not your job. It's our job.
Call us, we'll respond. Uh, and we will act appropriately.
Thank, Thank you very much, chief Ahern.
Um, Scott and counsel, if you don't mind, I just wanted to,
um, make clear what the chief meant when he said
our proclamation.
He was referring to the city council's resolution in 2017.
That was developed with the then council, the city manager,
and the then police chief.
It establishes a formal commitment
to non-biased policemen policing
and not to seek delegated authority status
to enforce federal immigration laws.
That's known as Section 2 87 G.
It prohibits the use of city resources to support
surveillance or registries based solely on race, religion,
ethnicity, gender, or national origin.
There is information on our website, um,
and that's what I just read from,
it's the title is Immigration Enforcement and Public Safety.
Alright, I think it's time to move to public hearings.
And action. City clerk, would you please read Ordinance 14,
Ordinance number 14 25 26,
amending Chapter 18 Parks and Recreation.
To add an article for cemeteries.
First reading passed on December 6th, 2025.
Passage will require a majority vote.
And as a reminder, this will be a roll call vote.
Thank you. Take it away.
So we have, uh, hopefully a easy
second meeting here for you.
Again, this, uh, ordinance change, um, authorizes, um,
the creation of rules for, uh, essentially creation of rules
for, uh, cemeteries that are under the control of the city.
So we don't own any cemeteries at this time,
but we do maintain two.
And so this, um, art, this ordinance amendment, again,
allows, um, the parks director to create rules subject
to your approval for the, um, essentially the operation
of those, uh, two facilities
or more in the future if we acquire more.
Thank you. Are there any questions from counselors?
I don't see any at this time.
We will open up this item to public comment.
Any public comment on this item? Any public comment online?
It Does not seeing any hands.
There's no one else on mine.
What is the wish of the council
Move for passage?
Thank you. Counselor Pride moves for passage.
We have a second Counselor. Coleman, any discussion?
Just can I note? Yes, I failed to note the, um,
when this agenda item was added,
there's a nice copy and paste feature.
Um, and I think what happened is it the, um,
last time this was taken up, this item was copy
and pasted, um, onto this agenda,
but you had made an amendment to the um, mm-hmm.
Ordinance and so that wasn't carried over.
So, uh, that was noted today and, um, our, excuse me.
Um, and so, uh, our staff had uploaded the, um,
correct version that's been included.
So I just wanna make sure you pass the, um, amended 1, 6 26,
um, uh, ordinance version.
Okay. Counselors, you're all clear on that.
That's what we're passing or it remains
to be seen if we're passing it.
Uh, could we have a roll call?
Did you have a question, counselor?
Pride? No, it's just when someone makes the motion,
it's usually their turn to go first. So,
Oh, I'm sorry. I missed you.
That's please. I I don't have any comment.
I just expected you to call on
Me that Yes. Well please
come on. Make up one now.
No, um, no I support this. It's pretty simple. Okay.
Thank you. My apologies. Counselor Coleman,
The amended version.
Thank you very much.
Alright, because this is a hybrid meeting, we need
to do a roll call vote
Counselor. Do
we when all the counselors are present in the
room? Okay. Yeah,
Because it was advertised as hybrid,
the state statute court was roll call vote even if it's just
hybrid or even if you're all here.
Okay. Okay. Counselor Coleman? Yes.
Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Scott?
Yes. Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West? Yes.
Mayor Matthew Mayor. Mayor Tipton.
He would've supported it too. I know he would've. Yes.
Thank you. Alright, that is six votes.
It's unanimous of all here. Thank you very much.
Madam City Clerk, would you read order 1 24,
Order 1 24, 25, 26 Granting just a girl LLC,
also known as Coppersmith Tavern
and Table at 6 71 Main Street,
a food establishment with liquor license.
This requires a majority vote.
Counselors, do we have any questions?
Do we have anyone who'd like
to make public comment about this item? Anyone online?
No, not mine. Alright.
What is the wish of the council for this one?
Councilor West Move for Passage. Thank you very much.
Do we have a second? Councilor Walker. Thank you very much.
Councilor West. No
Comment.
Thank you Councilor Walker. Just good luck to them.
That's a nice comment. Um, alright,
we need another roll call. Vote.
Councilor Coleman? Yes. Councilor Pride? Yes.
Councilor Scott? Yes. Councilor Walker? Yes. Councilor West?
Yes. And Mayor Tipton?
Yes. Thank you very much.
We're going to move to action on old
and new business City clerk.
Would you please read order 1 25?
Order 1 25. 25 26.
Approval of parks, recreation and waterfront departments.
City managed cemetery rules and regulations.
Passage requires majority vote
Counselors. Do we
have questions about this? Not at this time.
It does not appear. Folks, do we have public comment?
Nope. Online folks, do we have public comment? There's that.
No participants online right now.
Ahuh. Thank you very much.
Um, what is the wish of the council
counselor West?
Um, this is a weird one
because we just sort of approve it.
We don't pass these. Do you want me to move?
I move that we approve it.
Sounds appropriate. Alright.
Counselor West has moved for approval.
Do we have a second on her move for approval? Thank you.
Counselor Pride. Counselor West.
Yeah, I would just point out,
and this is within the purview of the parks director
to correct that the current rules say including
this cemetery and that cemetery.
And I think it's important
for the community if we're gonna call these things city
cemeteries to say specifically which
cemeteries we're referring to.
Okay. Can we, No, we don't have to do
Anything. We don't amend
an approval,
so we just take your recommendation.
Right. It's up to him. But
Thank you.
Clarity. We're in favor, I think. Um, alright.
Anyone else? Discussion? Alrighty.
Can do I think we do a roll call?
Vote for everything tonight. Yes, ma'am.
So can we have that please?
Counselor Coleman? Yes. Counselor Pride. Yes.
Counselor Scott? Yes. Counselor Walker. Yes. Counselor West.
Yes. Mayor Tipton?
Yes. Thank you Madam City Clerk,
please read order 1 26.
Order 1 26 25 26.
Establishing a u the us EPA funded Brownfield's
revolving loan program.
Passage requires majority vote.
Thank you very much. I think we
have a presentation coming. Yes. Turn
Over to the ci, assistant city manager.
Joshua Re Good
Evening, city Council.
Joshua Rain, assistant City manager.
I don't have a full PowerPoint presentation,
but I just wanted to give a, a verbal sort
of introduction to this.
So this last came to you, I,
I believe it was in July when you formally accepted the
grant from U-S-E-P-A in the amount of $1 million.
Um, this is just a wonderful grant opportunity for the city.
I can say. Um, a
after, uh, we established the program,
which is what's b before you tonight?
Um, we will have a, a full spectrum of services that,
and financial support, frankly, um, to support redevelopment
of properties that are suffering from, uh,
environmental contamination
or some something that's happened to the, to the,
the property, um, that would make a developer, uh,
question whether it's worth developing
or may just throw the, the project economics off enough
that, uh, we couldn't get the project otherwise cleaned up
and put to, um, a higher and better use in the community.
And so, um, a few years ago we had established our
assessment program and that we're able to do phase one
and phase two environmental site assessments.
We can also do reuse planning with those monies.
And now with the establishment of this revolving loan fund,
we can also assist with the cleanup of those properties.
Um, there are a whole host of rules and caveats.
You know, if, if you are, um, if you own a property
and you are, um, the person or the entity
or the business that caused the contamination,
you would not be eligible for this program.
So these are these legacy sites
where something may have happened, uh, a long time ago
and the property has switched hands several times
and the current owner is not the party that's liable.
Uh, but there's, there's, um, something that's tainting the,
the, the property and its ability to redevelop again.
So, uh, what's
before you tonight is, um,
a formal establishment of the program.
There is a program, policies
and procedures manual that, um, talks about how the, the,
the fund will be managed, um,
how the application process works, how, uh,
the applications are selected for funding.
Um, there's a small, um, committee
that would be established, uh, made up primarily
of city staff, but also a member
of the Economic Development Committee.
Um, and, uh, um, we're not anticipating
that there are gonna be, uh, a high volume
of loans through this program.
It's very likely that this is gonna be a limited number of,
uh, very meaningful loans
that we'll be doing over the next couple of years.
Um, as the fund is used, um, there is an opportunity
to recapitalize the fund
through subsequent grant applications through U-S-E-P-A.
Uh, they solicit those applications annually.
Um, it's a question mark as to
how much money might be available in the future,
but to the extent that we are successful with the program
and we've lent out most of the money, uh, we do intend
to subsequently apply for more, um, monies.
Um, uh, so anyway, that I think, you know,
I don't wanna go in too much detail.
There may be questions, but, um, I am available.
And also, um, our economic development, uh,
staff members are here as well to answer your questions.
Thanks very much. Josh.
Maybe you should stay there if people have questions.
Do counselors have some questions at this
time? Oh, I
Had a question, but Natalie's
Hand she beat you to it.
Counselor West,
your first you counselor Scott. And you're so polite.
I just wanted to confirm that, um,
I think GP Cog is helping to administer the loan fund
and they would have a one to 2%
Fee origination fee That's right. For
The loan amount?
Yep. Yes ma'am. Okay. Yep. Yep.
There's an administrative fee of that. I apologize.
I should have mentioned that as well.
They've been, they, they have a, um, a similar loan program.
They've been doing it for, um, a, a long time.
So they're seasoned and they have, um, experience with this.
And then they also have, um,
third party underwriters who they work with.
And so, um, as we're, this is new to us
and whereas we're establishing the program,
we thought it would be nice to align with
what they're already doing.
They've been successful so they have a proven record, um,
and, uh, utilize those services for the time being.
If at some point this program, um, grows
and as our staff gain more experience,
we may feel more comfortable taking on some of
that responsibility and using our own
third party underwriters.
But for the time being,
we thought this would be the most appropriate,
um, way to approach it. Thank you.
Yep. Councilor West, uh,
Will the council be informed of the, uh, loans
that are made pursuant to this?
We, we can absolutely do that.
We, um, we have a regular reporting, um, on the agenda
for the economic development committee.
Uh, but we could just as easily, um,
have something go out to the council as well.
Yeah, I'd like that. If the other counselors would,
I don't see anyone saying no.
Sure. But did you have question? Like whichever format
You question Councilor Pride?
Yeah, actually I do.
Um, I know from my work with G Co
that the executive committee has final say over whether
there brownfield's money gets applied or,
or gets granted or loaned out, I suppose.
Um, and so this isn't saying
that council isn't gonna have a say in
whether these funds are
Loaned not as the manual's written right now.
No, no. I just wanna know
and it's, it's, uh, yeah, we're heading.
It's, uh, it would be absolutely transparent.
This is something that would, um, it would go to this,
um, the loan committee.
But in addition to that, we've had from the, um, inception
of the assessment program,
we have a Brownfields advisory team,
which is a much larger body.
It, again, it's, it's, it is mostly staff,
but we have a representative from the, um,
housing authority, from the Land Trust
and from the Chamber of Commerce.
Uh, we have, so we've seat, oh, excuse me.
And we just recently added a member
of the economic development committee to that group as well.
And so as those decisions are made, there would be reporting
through that group and, and, and getting advice.
And then again, there'd be reporting
through the economic development committee.
So this, um, we want this to be transparent.
Um, and so we're happy
to whatever reporting requirement you folks would like
as a loan, you know, is um, is, um, approved.
If you'd like, like something on your agenda,
maybe under petitions
and communications, we could just add an item
to let you know, or whatever you'd like.
Communications. Any other questions from counselors?
I have one, um,
two actually clarification to make sure it's understood.
This is a fund established for businesses to apply to.
Only residents would not be able to apply to this fund,
Uh, correct. Or, or non-profits
homeowner.
But the, the really, the, the property has to have, um,
redevelopment potential, um,
and not for like a single family home.
You know, it really is intended more for, uh,
commercial industrial redevelopment.
Um, but it could be, you know, there are success stories
where there's multifamily housing, um, you know, it just,
or even park space, frankly.
I mean, some of these properties need to be cleaned up
and, you know, maybe there's some development
that can occur in some areas,
but there needs to be, um, the reuse plan in order
to, to, you know, depending on the nature of the site,
the characteristics of the site
and what issues it has, it may be that some portions
of the site site are best suited to have top soil
and leave it alone or create a parking area and,
and seal something off or, and,
and development in other areas.
So it really is a case by case basis.
Um, but yeah, to answer your question,
it's not really intended for like a,
a residential property in a, in a residential neighborhood.
It's, it's really intended for, largely
for commercial industrial redevelopment.
Okay. Thank you very much.
And I did hear you say that, um,
you don't expect a high volume of applicants, um,
but cleanup's expensive.
So in terms of replenishing this revolving loan fund, um,
is it only EPA grants that are allowable for replenishing
or are other funding sources acceptable?
Um, we, we should say Mysteriously
Materialized money, you know, yeah.
We, we could, we could fund this as well out
of our out high.
Um, but, you know, to the extent
that money's available at the federal level
and we're success, we've demonstrated success in the program
and we would be a good candidate for supplemental funding,
I think our, our first choice would be to apply, uh,
through U-S-E-P-A for supplemental,
but that we can always, um, supplement
with, with other monies.
Okay. Thank you.
Alright, well, um, what is the wish of the council
Councilor West move for passage?
Thank you. Do we have someone
to second counselor Scott, counselor West.
I'm, I'm glad we're doing this and I like this program
Good. But
I still wanna know who we loan the money to.
Okay. A little oversight. Never heard anything. Right.
Um, Ms.
Counselor Scott, sorry I'm out
of my mind for one second there.
Did you wanna say anything?
I, I do. I do appreciate, um, being kept up
to speed on sort of what's happening.
And I think it's a great, um, you know, opportunity
for the city to showcase what we're doing
with federal funds, which are special.
Well, we'll take all the special we can get. Thanks.
Do we wanna have a roll call? Vote. Councillor Coleman. Yes.
Counselor Pride. Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker. Yes. Counselor West. Yes.
And Mayor Tipton? Yes. Thank you very much.
City clerk. We have advanced to order 1 27, please
Order 1 27, 25 26.
Economic development business financial assistance program
passage requires majority vote.
Alright, so next up we have, uh, backup Leah Duffy,
our Economic Development director, who's going to, uh, talk
to the council about, uh, revamping, uh,
a current business assistance program, uh,
to make it a bit more effective
and usable for South Portland businesses.
I can get the right one up.
Here we go. Great.
There it is. All right.
Well, we're, we're very excited
to be presenting this program tonight.
Um, just to give you a little bit of background, uh,
earlier this year, at the beginning of fiscal year 26,
we presented a work plan
for both the economic development department as well
as the Economic Development Committee.
One of the topics within
that work plan is financial assistance programs.
Um, the challenge that we felt was
that the current portfolio of municipal grants
and loans was underutilized.
And in the memo that I sent you, I detailed that out.
And the current programs we have are a conditional economic
development grant, an EV charger grant,
and a revolving loan fund currently managed through GP Cog.
So what we found is there's very few applications.
Um, and
to us the task was let's review these current programs
and make recommendations for improvements.
'cause anybody who's owned a small business knows
that if there's money out there and nobody's applying
for it, then there's something wrong.
Um, the goal was to create a meaningful new program
that supports business retention
and expansion in the city of South Portland.
And the schedule started, as I said in the summer,
with a goal to present to council in early 2026
that we met that goal.
Um, when we talked about the Underutilized program,
we sat down and asked ourselves very, um,
important questions.
If it's underutilized, the question was really why.
And, you know, it doesn't mean
that the program was not aligned with
what the actual priorities
and needs of our business community are.
Um, are they achieving maximum benefit for BRE,
which is business retention
and expansion, which is the ultimate goal
of the economic development Department.
Um, we also wanted to look at what other municipalities
around us were offering and what their success stories
or challenges were in their programs
and learn from our neighbors.
And then also, because funds are limited in our city,
how do we use these funds responsibly with the most impact
to help the most number of businesses?
And can we build something that grows over time?
So, again, increasing impact.
The process we went through, we were brainstorming sessions
with a subcommittee of the EDC.
We did data gathering where we looked at the existing loans,
we looked at our neighboring, um, communities.
We talked with GP Cog,
and we whittled all that information down
and, um, developed a new program, policies, procedures,
and application criteria, which we then reviewed again
with the EDC, um, for feedback.
And that is what is being presented to you tonight.
So before I turn this over to our project manager, Ted Choi,
um, who's gonna give you the, the details of the program, I,
I do want to be really clear that
what you're hearing is a loan.
It's not a grant. And that's a very intentional,
and the reason for that is, is multi, um, multifold really
we feel that it's a responsible selection.
We want to choose businesses that are stable,
that will be contributing and will pay back their loans.
We also want to create meaningful longer term
partnerships with our businesses.
A grant is kind of one
and done, whereas a loan is a multi-year
partnership and relationship.
So it's an outreach
and a connection to that business
over a long period of time.
Then the, you know, really big thing is
that we recycle the funds.
Again, grants are one and done. So this has a bigger impact.
We loan it out, we get the money back, we give it
to somebody else, and we continue that cycle.
There is growth potential should we develop this program
and show the success of it.
We can add additional funds to the program.
And there is also the small amount of interest
that can be earned on the loans to help that program grow.
Um, neighboring communities have done it
and they've grown these programs from a million to a million
and a half dollars, and it really is significant impact, um,
um, to the businesses.
And I'm gonna let Ted get into the details of that. So,
Good evening. I'm Ted
Choi, ag Development Project Manager,
and, uh, full disclosure, I'm finding a bit
of a cough right now, so if I need to repeat anything,
please feel free to interrupt me as I go through this.
Um, so I'm gonna talk a little bit about the administration
of the program, um, what the, what we're going
to be planning to, to offer to businesses.
Um, and so the RF will offer two basic types of loans.
One is a traditional micro loan, usually used
for gap financing, uh, for businesses
to acquire things like equipment, uh, for their operation.
And then the flagship
of this program is the facade improvement loan.
It will have a forgivable interest portion,
which I can discuss later.
Um, on the right you can see the basic loan terms
that we'll be offering.
Uh, we've kept it broad on purpose to allow us
to be more flexible with the type of projects we'd like
to take on, um,
and give the committee more flexibility in, in what
to instruct us in what they'd like to see.
Uh, as this program gets started up, target two
to three loans a year, and hopefully we can get at least one
facade loan, uh, as part of that package.
Uh, we'll, we plan to start off relatively low volume
to kind of gauge demand of the program
and adjust it over time as we see that demand
and how we can better fit the program
to our local businesses.
Uh, and these are our eligible projects.
Um, the ones in the left,
those being the exterior building improvements like the
facade, uh, startup or expansion projects.
And then projects where the city will serve
as a gap financing role with a private lender
or maybe a lender like Chief P Cog using their RLF program.
Those are our preferred projects we'd like to target, uh,
using the RLF program.
And then you can see other eligible projects, uh,
on the right that would also be candidates for loans.
And I'd like to hit the startup for expansion projects.
As a, as a high note here, um, we've encountered a lot
of local businesses struggling with unplanned expenses,
whether that be a DA improvements
or sprinkler systems that need to be added
to their buildings, um, as they go
through the code and permitting process.
And so one of our main targets for this loan program is
to assist those businesses with businesses
with financing those unplanned costs.
Uh, Josh touched on this earlier
with the Brownfield program.
Uh, the RL committee will be the same composition
as the Brownfield program, uh,
and it will function relatively similarly.
Uh, it will, the only difference is it will have a little
bit more power in setting the program policy
where the Brownfields program, uh, a lot
of the policy is set by EPA and eligibility.
The this RLF program is fully contained within the city.
Uh, the RLF committee will have more control over
who we target with the loans
and what kind of applicants will be eligible.
And I put together two slides here, uh, that will kind of
work everyone through the process
and, uh, the roles
as will similar to the Brownfields program.
We'll partner with GP Cog on this.
Um, and so I've kind of just listed off the, the different
steps we'll hit as we intake loans and manage loans
and who will be responsible for those things.
So as you can see, it's very collaborative in nature, uh,
with GP Cog as we intake applications
and work through those and get the money out.
And then once we, once the money is out,
it stays collaborative as we collect repayments
and, uh, undertake borrower communication
report to the RLF committee.
And we could also, same with the Brown Bills RLF report
to City Council, uh, if requested.
And then any of those modifications,
interest forgiveness collections, uh,
will also be handled by the city.
These are the three items that are up
for council approval tonight.
Um, as Leah mentioned,
we'll be transitioning funds from the grant programs
and the old RLF into this one new revamped RLF program.
Uh, with that we have the RLF program manual,
the policy basically that dictates the program.
And then the MOU with greater Portland Council
of Governments, uh, that will be assisting
with administration of the program.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. So, okay. Excellent.
I'm sure Council, well,
I believe counselors will have some questions.
Counselors, counsel. Wes,
Uh, this is a question,
but it's a little hard to keep it from being a comment.
One of your slides said the interest rate will be near
prime, which sounded really good to me,
but when I read page six of the manual, it says,
rates will typically be in a range of prime plus
or minus 4%, which doesn't sound very close to Prime
because Prime is currently 6.75%.
And so I wondered what you thought about that range of plus
or minus 4% for your interest rates.
Yeah, so, um, the, just to as kind
of broadly answer your question, uh, the plan right now is
for the RLF committee to set a guideline
of terms every fiscal year.
And so in the program manual,
it's intentionally kept extremely broad, I would say.
And then the R and the RLF committee will narrow it down.
So say that, uh, the Arla committee meets,
and they could set it as prime plus
or minus 1% plus or minus 2%.
Um, and then on an individual loan by loan basis,
we would also take into account any, uh, guidance given
to us by the underwriters.
Um, and so the program manual is a intentionally
set in a broad manner.
And then the RF committee will set, um,
or recommend terms that will be applied
individually to each loan.
Thank you. Other counselors with questions?
Questions, questions? Yes. Councilor Walker.
Um, just in terms of outreach, so one of,
I know first I wanna commend you, um, for looking at the,
the scenario and saying, why isn't this being used?
But if we're doing the work to, um, kind
of recreate the program, is there some sort of outreach plan
so that we don't fall also into this trap in the future?
Yeah, absolutely. I, I would say the first thing that, uh,
we've done is we're we've worked more collaboratively,
collaboratively with GP Cog, um, in setting up the program.
I think the program before, uh, it was rather duplicative
of their services that they offered.
And so in setting up this program, we've kind
of looked at filling the gaps
that they don't offer loans for.
Um, and so that we can hit a, a, a section of
business financing that isn't being offered.
And then two, we've been, uh, pushing out, uh,
this program into community private lenders, uh,
think like Bangor Savings Bank, m
and t Bank, uh, private lenders like that.
We've meeting, been meeting with their, um,
commercial loan officers to kind
of advertise this program in hopes that we can fill gaps,
uh, in from their clients where perhaps they wanted
to finance some new, uh, equipment for their program.
The lender only wanted to do 30,000, but they needed 50,000
and then they could refer them
to the RLF in which we might be able to finance
that last 20,000.
Um, so a lot of our marketing has been that way.
And then I would say the final, um, key
to this is we get a lot of businesses coming in
to ask about code, to ask about licensing, um,
and many other questions in the economic development office.
And we will talk to all of
those businesses about this program.
Um, so we're kind of hitting it
on those three fronts right now.
Thank you. Yep. Any other questions? Counselors?
I have a, a question.
Um, well first of all, thank you to you and Director Duffy.
Um, this just seems like a really good, smart way
of collecting things, monies, basically,
that are in different, um, buckets
and pulling them in into an understandable
and well-managed way of assisting our businesses.
Um, I guess the question I have is about managing, I,
I know this would be brand new,
but do you have any way of predicting, you know, next three
to five years how many loans you would've made
that would be being managed at one time?
I'll say that, um, in the first year, our target is two
to three, and that's going to be to
gauge interest in the program.
Um, you know, we have a limited amount of funds at
between a hundred thousand, $200,000.
Um, so we'll, we'll target two to three loans in
that 25 to $50,000 range.
And then based on that,
reevaluate the best use of the program.
Um, perhaps we narrow down our criteria to, uh,
view our eligible projects or we increase that criteria.
Um, but it's, it's going to be a lot of, uh,
dipping our toe in this year to see what works, what,
what the interest is, and going from there.
And, and did you say you would reevaluate
after about 12 months or did you say it was longer?
Okay. 12 months. Yeah. Thanks. That makes sense.
Um, and then, well,
I think you've pretty well explained everything else.
Um, yeah, I just, whoops, I'm coming dangerously close
to making a comment, which I will not do.
So, um, if there are no other questions from counselors,
we're going to open this one up for public comment.
Public comment from anyone here, public comment
from anyone online on this agenda item.
Okay. Well, what is the wish of our council councilor West
Move for Passage?
Thank you. Councilor West. Do we have a second?
Well, we have Councilor Walker.
Thank you very much. Councilor West.
I think this is a great program.
Just like I like the other one.
I, I think the fact that it's a loan
program is really important.
I strongly support that.
I do, however, strongly support low interest rates.
I mean, I want our, the people, the businesses that we loan
to, to be good investments and encourage them.
But if they can meet our standards
and be eligible for a loan, I hope
that we will keep the rates low
because as they say about banks, there's nothing like a bank
to lend you money once you show them you don't need any.
And I, um, I think that we also,
I would like to have a report here on the status
of it every year, how what we've loaned, what's outstanding,
how the amounts are being repaid,
and I think that that would be an important part
of this program just for our information.
Thank you Councilor Walker.
Just congratulations to the economic development partner
or project department, uh, for great idea.
Kudos. Does anyone else wanna make a comment?
Counselors, I just, I have a question for you, Scott,
which is, um, twice it's been suggested
that these new programs have a report back to council.
Can that be written in, in some official way?
And they're new management rules.
Uh, I think you're appro approving them tonight,
so if you want an officially written,
written in, you could amend it.
Otherwise we, we've got the memo
and, uh, can make All right. Make those reports.
Well, we know these people and where to find 'em.
So I think it sounds like we'll be safe.
Does anyone disagree? Alright, we're good then. Thank you.
Can we have a roll call? Vote
Counselor Coleman?
Yes. Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker. Yes. Counselor West. Yes. Mayor Tipton.
Yes. Thank you very much.
Let's move on to ordinance number 15, please. City clerk.
Ordinance number 15 25 26 amending chapter 27 zoning.
Regarding miscellaneous amendments.
This is the first reading passage requires majority vote.
A presentation, ah, from our favorite planning director,
you have more than one.
So as Milan's, uh, setting up here, we've got, um,
we've got, uh, as you all know, counselors, from time
to time we bring to you miscellaneous zoning updates.
Um, you know,
sometimes there's just like non substantive items
that we feel just need to be cleaned up.
There's inconsistency.
Sometimes there's errors or out of date citations
and in some cases also changes to state law
that necessitate updates.
So, um, as you kind of noted in Milan's memo
and in the position paper, there's a number
of different updates that are being requested
to chapter 27 zoning this evening.
Uh, Milan will review some of those here with you.
Uh, and, uh, obviously at the end
of the day we're seeking approval of, uh,
of the first read of these changes.
Alright, thank you so much.
Ready? Thank you Mayor Tipton
and Scott, um, members of council.
So, uh, just as our, our roadmap, um,
on the 14th we went to the planning board.
And this is your first of two hearings.
Uh, and then if the ordinance is passed,
it'll take effect 20 days from your second reading.
Uh, on the 14th,
the planning board approved the item six oh.
Um, didn't really get into any substantive conversation
around, uh, the ordinance changes that, uh, need
to be reported to you and your deliberation.
Um, I have slides for all of the changes.
I'm gonna move rather quick because they're summarized in
the memo, and I think you've got other items
to focus on tonight.
Um, but as Scott mentioned, they're periodic updates.
Most of these things we learn from internally just looking
at the ordinance and wrestling through some of the, um,
language in there that's been, you know,
in some cases cobbled together over decades.
Um, other times we learn things from applicants
and we are eager to bring forward items that, um, you know,
just seem like good practice in line
with other guidance councils provided.
So there are some tidbits in here that, um, will be helpful
to, you know, businesses
or others that are, uh,
interested in doing business in our town.
Um, on the scope of changes we have, um, uh,
a large bunch of edits in the di minimis change
and minor amendments section.
And this is in the general trend of streamlining, uh,
reviews of projects, particularly projects
that we've become quite familiar with,
that the planning board is routinely approving
and we have really solid standards on.
Um, and so that's what, uh, is the flavor
of all the changes in the di minimus realm,
which are the staff level reviews.
Just as a reminder, any staff decision
that's made on a staff level review is reported out
to the next planning board hearing.
And the planning board has an opportunity to weigh in on
that if they feel there's a concern
or there's some, you know, um,
sloppy decision making that was made.
It was meant to be as a stopgap there.
So we always have that check and balance.
Um, a number of definition updates.
Um, a lot of them mostly cleaning up things.
But I do wanna call out the banquet and event facilities.
This is something that we've been working with a, a number
of, uh, vendors on.
Um, our ordinance, frankly just didn't have this vocabulary.
So we had to create the notion
of a banquet and an event facility.
Uh, the closest thing we had was a convention center,
which I think most people gravitate to a very large context
and banquet event facilities are not quite that.
And, you know, maybe, uh,
deserve a different kind of review.
Uh, and so we separated banquet
and event facilities from convention centers
and made reference to each other.
And really the big differences at 10,000 square feet year in
one or you're in the other.
Um, so once these things get at large scale,
then we really apply the convention center approach.
It's meaningful to do that
because there are things like, um, traffic
or parking manuals that study national trends, uh,
for different kinds of land uses.
And they will recognize things like large scale convention
centers, which just start to operate a little bit
differently once they get at scale.
Uh, so we try to define those and differentiate them.
Uh, there are a number of edits in this red line package
that deal, that sort of stem from now having a definition
for banquet and event facilities.
I'm not gonna itemize each one of those,
but just understand when we established the land use,
we then inserted it into every zone where restaurants
or other complimentary type uses were already allowed
and we carry forward all the footnotes that you, uh,
or prior counsels had applied to restaurants.
So if a restaurant can't open from 11:00 PM to 6:00 AM
or 8:00 AM or whatever it is, the same thing was applied
to banquet and event facilities.
Um, now, uh, I do want to call out
because these are miscellaneous ornament ordinance
amendments that we didn't get into the business of, um,
correcting all those hours of operation.
If you all remember from when we switched
to the land use tables, we did this overhaul of all
of our land use definitions.
Um, and we didn't get into what,
what actually do we care about
for overnight business operations
and restaurants in particular have this really variable
landscape of some can o open until 11, some can open
until midnight, some can open until 1:00 AM.
We didn't solve that problem here
because these are miscellaneous.
Uh, I think we just want to look at
restaurants kind of wholesale.
We probably will do that within the zoning update
for the comp plan implementation.
So just it,
you'll see all these different numbers on the OR in the
ordinance and they're still there.
Uh, I'd like to get away from them
and at least standardize an
approach if we're gonna take one.
Um, it just needs a little bit more study.
Um, we introduced the nas, uh,
which is the North American Industry Classification System
as much as we can into our land use tables,
because it just speaks as a very consistent language.
Um, and we're trying to differentiate uses, like
for instance, sometimes auto repair, um,
is something we care about more so,
or wanna regulate more aggressively than things like
personal service repair or personal machinery repair.
So you're taking your car
or something that's really, uh, potentially leaking, um,
pollutants into the soil
that's gonna be treated differently than, you know,
if you're trying to fix a toaster.
And NAS recognizes these differences.
So we often lean on nas.
I just wanna call it out 'cause it's not,
it's something we've been doing over the last couple
of years, and you may have noticed,
but we certainly do it here.
Um, non-conforming, lots of record.
Uh, so you may recall back in 2015, we adopted a whole host
of standards and protocols on
how we review non-conforming, lots of record.
It was a new thing for us.
And the community was very concerned with seeing these sort
of double lots, which were actually subdivided
back in the 18 hundreds.
Someone going ahead and building in that side yard.
Um, how are they gonna do it? The lots are small.
Can they achieve all the drainage?
Can, can I be assured that my basement's not gonna flood?
All of those concerns were there, um, fitting in
with the fabric, the design character of the homes.
That was a lot of the conversation.
And so as a result, the ordinance has a number of standards
that these single family homes have to go through
that no other single family home has to go through.
If you're in a zone that requires a 6,000 square foot
minimum lot size, and your lot is 5,999, you're required
to take your single family home to the planning board.
And for that single family home, you have to demonstrate
that your roof matches the prevailing pattern of roofs all
around in the neighborhood that your building face is
as distant from the road as most in the neighborhood.
Uh, and a variety of other, a catalog
of design characteristics.
Um, all well intentioned and good.
The thing we've learned though of through eight years
of implementation is
that our neighborhoods really do not have a single
defining characteristic to them.
There isn't a neighborhood in South Portland
that isn't highly diversified.
There is no, you know,
gable roof neighborhood of South Portland.
And so every time we go through this review,
the applicants just come back
and find no prevailing pattern, and
therefore we will propose some common New England character
to a single family home, which is what people want to build.
Uh, and so we're learning from that
and just recommending here that we take out all the ones
that we've never been able to establish any
kind of prevailing pattern on.
There are some that we maintain, which we have, um,
found some form of style on.
I'm happy to discuss with the council if you wanna
streamline these even further.
Frankly, many of them will be through the LDS
that got passed recently that I'll be talking
to you about later tonight.
Um, but here we're just trying to recognize
that people don't need to produce something for us to just
approve it anyway, because we know
what they're gonna find at the end of that research.
Um, sp space and bulk standards in the zoning districts.
There's been several cleanups here, mostly on terminology,
nothing, uh, really of substance.
Um, for instance,
we often mismatched whether we were talking
or intending to talk about buildings versus structures.
Buildings are habit inhabited
or occupied structures can be anything that,
um, is built on the earth.
And so we just needed to synchronize when we use
those terms properly.
Um, there are several terms that we've used over the years
that we never actually applied any standards to.
So sometimes we're just removing references to those.
Uh, in the definition section, you saw a note here
that we removed day spas.
We never actually permitted or not per
or didn't permit day spas.
It just was a term, uh, that existed from who knows when,
but we don't actually regulate it.
So in space and bulk standards
where we might establish an increased setback to a land use
that's never really used through the ordinance
or is used in some other definition, we've deleted those,
um, uh, ineffective footnotes and, uh, standards.
There are a couple of zones, uh, the BC zone
and the MHCC zone, um, BC's Broadway corridor.
It's, it's just a stone's throw from here on Broadway in the
Mill Creek, um, downtown area.
And then, uh, meeting House Hill, uh,
is out on outer cottage.
These zones were new infill mixed use zones along our bigger
corridors, cottage and Broadway.
In this case, when those were being adopted,
they adopted enhanced, uh, separation standards
because they were concerned that
by having these new mixed use developments
and commercial activity there, that it might create noise
and nuisances for the neighbors, uh, immediately adjacent.
Uh, the problem is that in the BC zone,
there is no residential neighborhood
immediately adjacent to it.
It's surrounded by the MCC zone.
So it's, it's good in theory,
but it's actually meaningless, uh, in that zone.
So we've taken it out. Uh,
and in the MHCC zone, the sensitivity was
around principle structures, not a sh a small shed, um,
but the actual big house.
So we've, uh, just clarified things like that.
Uh, state law has passed, um,
and required us to allow child, adult
and combined daycare centers in residential zones.
So we've done that in this ordinance that's already,
uh, chaptered law.
So it's not something we have to wait for July on.
Um, allowed uses in some
of our mixed use in commercial districts.
We've clarified trying to learn from the council on, um,
you know, decisions that's made recently
and where our zoning, um, has already made certain decisions
and it's just inconsistently applied.
So for instance, our zoning ordinance is pretty liberal on
where government offices, fire and police facilities can be.
Um, but we are a little bit patchy in applying
that same within, uh, mixed use districts.
So for instance, in the AA residential districts, um,
that are on the outskirts of town,
we allow this whole menu of options.
But in our, um, you know, more urban context, we,
we didn't list those in there.
Um, commercial indoor recreation's been happening at the
mall for decades.
Um, it's just never actually formally
been permitted in the zone.
And it's because commercial indoor recreation was subsumed
within, uh, services and retail in the past.
And so we've now got this new definition
and we need to list it as available land use.
Um, I mentioned day spas,
combined residential recreation is another land use
that really is not defined, does not make sense, and so,
and is never used in the ordinance,
but it exists in definition.
So we've taken it out of the tables.
Um, you recently passed some ordinances that, uh,
allowed the CG district to do more with restaurants, um,
and in that time we're supportive
of allowing some additional flexibility of this kind.
And then we had the retail allowance within CG as well.
And I think council again reiterated
that this seems like the right place in the right zone.
Why hasn't it been allowed?
And so in this case, we're going ahead
and allowing it as a permitted use.
Anything that we changed in this ordinance amendment
that went from special exception to permitted is
because the defining characteristic between those is whether
or not that same land use could be put on a different
property in the same zone and have
significantly less impact.
And a restaurant in one location versus another is really
never going to have differentiated outcomes.
It's a restaurant either way.
And so, um,
this putting it into special exception category
really didn't have any effect.
And we have pretty robust site plan standards,
so we're just cleaning that up.
Um, it still goes through the same level of review.
Again, banquet and event facilities were added throughout.
Lodging establishments have been allowed in the il, which is
where our airport in is, for instance.
Uh, seems like a logical place for lodgings following from,
you know, council guidance on what we did in the CG zone.
We tried to, uh, allow uses that seem to make sense.
Um, I think the, just in the interest of time,
I will just call out two more for you that are, all
of these are itemized in the memo.
Um, under, uh, off street parking regulations.
Uh, we are required now under state law
to only require one space per dwelling unit.
So that's been carried in.
Uh, and that is, again, chapter law,
already not waiting to take effect.
And childcare facilities were given a prescriptive,
um, parking standard.
So again, we, we copied that in
the parking standard section has, uh,
these long verbose paragraphs about what,
when you can allow parking, not on this project site,
but for instance, on an adjacent site
and fact, they've allowed them within 1500 feet.
And so we have actually two paragraphs that say, uh,
virtually the same thing.
So we're just cleaning that up.
Uh, we're also saying
that whoever the review authority is the one
who has the ability to approve that parking.
So the ordinance says it's okay within 1500 feet within
these parameters.
And if it's going to the planning board,
the planning board will make that decision.
If it's going to the code enforcement officer,
the code enforcement officer will make that decision.
Um, the other thing we clarified in here is
that we've always had this notion that you could, um, allow
or have, uh, public parking, uh, lots serve
as your projects parking.
Um, but we didn't really elaborate on what are the, some
of the concerns with doing that.
And so we've inserted language here to make it clear
that if you're proposing to use a public parking facility,
should for instance the city ever build a,
a parking garage at the mall
and try to make it available to spur on development,
that development will be able to use that parking.
But they'll have to demonstrate
that the parking isn't oversubscribed, that the amount
that they're gonna use is not gonna cause problems
for others that are also sharing that parking and so on.
So they need to do an analysis of that.
So yes, it's a public facility,
but no one, uh,
development can basically just take it all on
and then not have anyone else served by it.
So we wanted to clarify that. That's our expectation.
Um, and also be clear, uh, for instance,
on things like the winter parking ban,
which we currently have in effect, yes,
we have on street parking, but you can't count that
for year round, day round, uh, parking for residential, uh,
because you can't service it in the winter.
So setting some clarity there.
Um, okay, so this is one that's highlighted here in red
and it's the last bullet on your slide.
I wanna highlight this one.
Um, uh, LD 1829 passed
and is scheduled currently to take effect in July.
There is an amendment bill and process,
and it's possible that that date could be bumped out
until the end of the calendar year.
This council has at least on two occasions, uh, well a,
a city council has at least on two occasions expressed that
city of South Portland wants
to enforce an owner occupancy requirement for ADUs.
And that's what's in our books today.
Um, if the amendment bill doesn't pass, um,
then on July 1st,
we will no longer be able to enforce that standard.
The council, because you've had so much deliberation on it,
um, you've sort of expressed your, your position
and it really just becomes a policy matter.
It's just that on July 1st you will no longer be
able to make that decision.
So we could just wait
and do another round of miscellaneous amendments to capture
that come July.
Um, we felt,
because again, council had already expressed itself on this
topic, uh,
that we could just include it in this round of edits.
And, you know, sort of the conversation about it is,
is a little mood at this point.
'cause the legislature looks like it's gonna do the work
of figuring out whether we can do it.
So I have included it in this packet,
but technically it doesn't take effect until July.
We're, I guess, presenting you to you two months
before we normally would.
Um, This one's a little wonky, happy
to get into the tree protection
modification if you're interested.
Um, but we're really just trying
to get consistency on when we apply
the mandatory reductions.
And then the last one to call out is another,
uh, LD provision.
Um, this one LD 9 97, which requires municipalities
to allow an additional floor of height
for an affordable housing project.
Um, this has an important limiter
and that is only up to 55 feet.
So if our zone sets a height limit of 40 feet
and someone wants to propose an affordable housing project
and they need to go to 45 feet
because that's how they spaced everything out, this, uh,
statute and now the updates in our ordinance will allow them
to go to 45 feet and reach our normal height standard.
If our zone allowed 55 feet or 60 feet
or 70 feet, um, this provision is meaningless, um,
because it can't kick in beyond 55 feet.
So our upper limit, but still control.
Um, and that's all the edits. I know I skipped over a bunch.
I'm happy to dive into any,
uh, that you may be more interested.
Okay, thank you so much Milan.
I'm always curious about
what it might look like in the planning department when
these sessions are going on to figure this all out.
Just for those of us who don't have to figure this all out,
it seems like it must be a very impressive process.
Do any counselors have questions?
I have one question
because I think day spas is something
that got my attention anyway.
When you say day spas, you do not mean hair salons.
You do not mean massage centers.
You do not mean nail salons.
You do not mean beautiful places where you can go
and get facials.
All of those are as is.
Uh, so in the last, well maybe more than the last,
like four sessions ago
with miscellaneous ordinance amendments, we came to you
with the land use tables.
One of the things we, we did
and why that was such a laborious effort is
because we had just so many different terms
for the same thing or slightly different modified
versions of the same thing.
Um, personal services was one of those
where sometimes we called it personal services,
sometimes we actually called out massage areas.
Sometimes we called out beauty parlors.
And just over the decades people just used different terms
and didn't bother to go ahead and harmonize them all.
So we came to you with a disposition table as we called it,
which was, here's a chunk of uses.
The worst offender I think was actually government, uh,
offices that we just had, I think seven
or eight different ways of saying government offices,
something that would be a city hall.
And so we said, look, these,
these are all the ways we talk about it going forward.
We will just use this term government offices,
or we'll just use this term personal services.
And one that we missed was,
well actually no, we didn't miss it.
Days pause was retained
because we didn't want
to get into major substantive edits of what should be.
We just wanted to transcribe
what is into new consistent terms.
Um, we held off on day spas
because we thought that there was somewhere in some
ordinance, maybe even in chapter 14 where we do licensing
some care about day spas, maybe some association
with other things.
Anyways, we haven't been able to find any actual regulation
of day spas, so now we can confirm it really is nothing
different than all the other person.
Okay. Okay. So it takes some doing, but, um, yeah.
Alright, thank you very much.
Do we have any public comment on this topic? Yes, please.
I'm using my phone for notes.
You won't be the first and you won't be the last.
Um, my name is Leanne Black
and I am the owner of a new business that started in 2025,
um, grateful culinary collaborations
and we're located at 18
Ocean Street in the former snow squall.
Um, so I wanted to, um, Just
express my, uh, gratitude to the city for
considering us to be able to use that as an event space.
Um, catering and private chefing is what we do.
Um, but it is very seasonal, so in the off season we're kind
of looking to, um, fill some, uh,
gaps in our schedule.
Um, a couple of residents and nonprofits
and businesses had approached me
about a opening up the space, um, as,
um, a rental.
And, um, I worked with my landlord, um, Southport Marine,
and we kind of came, decided that we would come to the city
and go through the licensing process.
So I was very lucky and fortunate to meet Leah.
And, um, she, she has helped me through the process.
Um, so I just wanted to kinda express our intent
to use it to open up to residents, businesses,
and non-profit so that we can help the
community have a place to gather for, whether it be
for a networking meeting
or for, uh, a family event
or, um, uh,
Uh, Fundraising opportunity.
So, um, thank you.
Um, and one more thing, I just wanna give a shout out to,
um, everybody that helped me with my licensing from, uh,
the licensing department to um, uh, Amy Roy.
She's like the, my biggest rock star.
So I just want you to recognize
that the city's been super helpful in
helping me through the process.
So I'm extremely grateful
and can't wait for 2026. Thank
You. Thanks
very much.
Anyone else with a comment relevant
to the zoning amendments?
Thank you.
Hi, My name is Kate Star and I'm the owner of Bread
and Butter Catering and also a South Portland resident.
Oh, thank you all community members.
Um, I wanna secondly and welcome Portland.
Uh, the, we just have been sitting on a lost
opportunity for a long time.
We cater in Portland all the time
and all over the state of Maine,
but we've really been very rarely able to do
that here in our home.
We are lucky enough to have taken over the space next
to ours, uh, that we're using as a co-working space.
But it's a beautiful open space that would be ideal
for exactly such uses that you're going for.
The smaller, more intimate events, the rehearsals,
the baby showers, the fundraising, marketing, uh,
networking events that we really don't have anywhere
to do in South Portland.
Currently we have the hotels that have all
of their own in-house catering
and their own, you know, sort of larger corporate markets.
And then we have a lot of private clubs like yacht clubs
or the Eagles clubs and things.
So it's a lot of hoops for our community to jump through.
So being able to just have an actual code that we can apply.
'cause we were working, we were getting creative there
for a minute to see what box we could fit in.
But when it comes down to it, just having the language
around exactly what it is that we're trying
to offer our community would be incredibly helpful.
And thank you all so much for being creative
and helping us work through this
and figuring out how to make the right,
uh, place for us to fit. All right. Thank
You all. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
And thanks for bread and butter.
Um, is there anyone else who would like to make a comment?
Okay, anyone online? No one's still online. Okay.
What is the wish of our council
regarding these zoning amendments?
Councilor West, are you moving for passage? Yes, thank you.
Oh, councilor Coleman seems to be seconding
Councilor West. The
Reason I like to be first is so I can talk,
We didn't suspect a thing.
I, so I just do have to ask a couple
of clarifying questions.
Um, except I wanna say first
how much I appreciate the attention
to detail in our zoning department.
Thank you very much for, uh, paying attention
to all these things and for, for making these changes
and keeping our ordinance up to date and consistent.
So if I understood right,
we're now gonna be allowed just under the zoning ordinance
to have government and police facilities in the A district.
Is that one of the changes?
Uh, yes.
Uh, well either, um, they're already permitted
and being allowed to just be permitted
instead of special exception.
Um, or they're permitted.
So that takes care of the Mahoney issue that now
as a matter of Right.
The police department could be there
and the government facilities could be
there once we do this.
Correct. Yeah. Okay, thanks.
And I do, I just wanna say this, I live in one
of the parts of the community that probably has seen
the largest infill from the homes of
that have been built in the side yards on the old lots.
And I think the city has done an outstanding job.
I really, there's a diversity in those homes and,
but they still fit into the community
and they add to the, to the fiber of our community.
And I thought that it was happening
because we had those design standards.
But are you telling me that it's doesn't have anything to do
with those, all those nice houses have nothing
to do with these design
Standards? No. Yeah,
they, um, in fact,
the ordinance would've required them
to not be differentiated to be similar
to whatever's been there.
So had there been, you know, a, a monotony in a bar in our,
uh, design pattern, then it would've reinforced
that rather than been the diversity that it is.
And so largely what's, um,
applicants are bringing forward is just
what the market's seeking, um, and able to produce.
And it just so happens that it doesn't run up against any
of our standards because they're just not enforceable.
Okay. And then finally, a comment on the owner occupied
and the ADUs, again, for my neighborhood, the problem
that we have is, and I understand
and I've never liked those subjective zoning requirements
anyway, but the problem we have is
that there are out-of-state owners who come in
and buy those properties and use 'em for vacation rentals.
So when we pass this, I think as a council, we have got
to make the commitment to more aggressive enforcement
of our vacation rental ordinances.
I have repeated objection repeated complaints
to me about people doing it under the table.
And I, um, and I think we, that's one
of the things in this next fiscal year when we think about
what our responsibilities are to the community that needs
to go hand in glove with this change in the law.
So thanks very much. And I'm still voting. Yes.
Thank you. Milan, did you wanna say anything? Councilor
Coleman? I just thought it was
really exciting
that we've expanded opportunities
for the caterers in our community
and supporting WI Women in business.
Good comments. Thank you.
Um, so before we vote, I just want to make sure
everyone on council, 'cause some
of you were not here the last time this came up.
Currently we ask that ADUs are own or occupied.
The state is going to make that not
what we can do either in July or by the end of the year.
Milan was asking, do we want to vote on that now?
So we're eliminating owner occupied requirement now,
or do we wanna wait
and see what's happening at the state
level in terms of timing?
Folks understand that? Any particular opinions or comments?
Because if you don't say no, it is part
of tonight's vote. Okay, then
Just a clarification.
So if the law does not go through,
we are saying it's still okay or
We're, right now we say that they must be owner occupied.
Yes, the state is TA saying no,
that's no longer going to be true.
Whether that becomes effective at the state level in July
or the end of the year remains to be seen.
It's, it also could be that it's that all
of the changes in 1829 go away altogether.
But I think that's highly doubtful.
Yeah, we've been tracking this stuff of the legislature.
There is an amendment bill that affects the date,
but right now nothing's been submitted
that would just wipe away that ARD law.
Um, so it, it's, um, it's law today,
it does just doesn't take effect until July.
And we're not obligated to catch up with it until July.
That July date may get bumped out.
So I guess it's possible that a subsequent, uh,
session could come in with a whole new thing
that just brings that back or, or deletes it.
Um, frankly, almost all of the discussion
around 1829 has nothing to do
with this whole new occupancy piece.
Some people could have cared about it,
but so much else within that bill has been a focus of energy
that I'm not sure if that, you know, removal
or going back to allowing owner occupancy would become a
thing, in which case we would come back to you and,
And Milan, I think, um, once we get to your workshop soon,
coming soon, um, we're going to hear more about some
of the changes that LD 1829 has put in place.
Okay. So I'm not hearing
anyone is Yes. Counselor Walker.
I just wanted to clarify.
So you're saying Mayor Tipton, that if we vote yes,
we're also voting to say we are going
to amend our ordinances
or we're going to, we're passing the changes
that remove owner occupancy from ADUs.
Yes. And that would occur in advance of the July 1st,
the current July 1st, uh, state effective date.
Right. So again, I don't see any counselor moving
to amend, so I do think we're ready for a roll call.
Vote.
Councilor Coleman? Yes. Councilor Pride. Yes.
Councillor Scott? Yes. Councillor Walker? Yes.
Councillor West? Yes. Mayor Tifton?
Yes. All right. Thank you very much.
We are going to order 1 28 now. City clerk
Please Read that for us. Madam City Clerk
Order 1 28 25 26 adopting changes
to the city's master fee schedule affecting fees
for the fire department Parks North Creation
Police Department and city clerk's.
Office passage will require a majority vote as outlined.
There are a few departments that have submitted changes.
Um, I will give a summation of those.
And we do have our chief of police here, if you wishes
to speak on parking fees.
The fire department has simply made their percentage
increases to select fees that were applicable.
Police department has adjusted two parking fees.
One is the overnight
and the second is for Snow weathers.
There's a specific ticket that would be issued at that point
between the parking band season for December through April.
Parks and Recreation has made amendments for their use fees,
specifically their fields and courts
and their multipurpose rooms.
Uh, the city clerk's office has gone through,
which was the request of the council
to really look at our fees
and make increases where necessary.
Um, we did a thorough review
of our surrounding neighborhoods as well
as looking at the state level.
And we are and still are, um, on the lower end
of those feess, we are very targeted
as to what we did increase.
There are some that are substantially increased Roller rink,
for example, which has not been increased since 1990.
So those did see some.
We do not currently have businesses that are in those
locations or establishments.
Uh, so it will affect only new licenses.
And then we went through and updated incrementally for
a few different licenses.
Um, I think maybe five, 10,
a hundred dollars depending on the license fees, just
to bring them in alignment with our surrounding communities
as well as across the state
for those specific license types.
If there are specific questions, I'd be happy
to answer why we landed on the fee that we did,
or if anything should be changed in the purview of council,
we can also make those changes.
I did not include anything regarding our short-term rentals
for our adu, um, as
that has not currently become effect yet.
So if that is something that is the council moves forward on
and the state, we would make those adjustments later.
Additionally, our marijuana establishments were not included
in this update because we do have ordinance changes
that are coming forward that will expand on those
and I'll update those at that time.
Okay, thank you very much.
So hopefully our counselors have had time to review
the proposed fee changes.
Does anyone have questions?
Any questions? No, ma'am.
No, it doesn't look like we have questions,
comments from those here?
Comments from those online line?
Alright. What is the wish of the council counselor?
Pride move
For passage. Thank
you. Counselor Pride. Do we have a second?
Counselor? Coleman, you look eager to second.
Thank you very much. Counselor Pride?
Everything looks good here. No, no further comment.
Counselor Coleman.
And I think we should be in line
with other communities. Yeah.
Anyone else have comments?
Well, I'll just comment that I know this was a lot of work.
I have looked at all the fees.
I'll try to, um, you know, I'll pay fees that I need to
and I'll try to behave myself as regards parking.
And, um, thank you very much to everyone who has put in
so much work to get these in order.
Do we ever roll call Vote
Counselor Coleman?
Yes. Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West?
Yes. And Mayor Tipton?
Yes. Thank you. Madam City Clerk,
could you please read order 1 29?
Order 1 29. 25 26.
Acceptance of grants and donation passage
requires majority vote.
As you can see in the packet, we had quite a few donations
and grants that came through to the city.
Uh, we did receive a bus from South Portland Housing
Authority for our Parks and Recreation department.
Our annual grant program for our employee wellness committee
came through for $10,520.
We continue to receive donations
for our general assistance heating program
and for the public library.
And then lastly, we have a donation from Woodward Kern
for 1,125 to present a documentary film
unless something goes terribly wrong, which will be done,
I believe, at our library coming up.
Thank you. I forgot that was the name.
And I was like, what? What, thank you very much.
Um, do any of the counselors have questions?
I have a quick question.
The South Portland Wellness
Committee, I don't know what that is.
That is our employment, um, comes out
of our HR wellness committee.
So take the staff. It's part of our,
it's a insurance for employees.
So it is a program to encourage us
to participate in wellness activities, whether it's exercise
or educational opportunities for staff.
Excellent. Thank you. We've learned counselors
comments que I mean questions?
Anyone with comments out there? Anyone?
Oh, did you have a comment?
We have a comment from the audience,
Josh or any assistant city manager.
I just wanted to call out the housing authority
for the donation of the, the shuttle van.
Um, it's something that they've had for a while.
It's, uh, underutilized.
Um, we've gotten some use out of it,
borrowing it a few times.
They recognized that the city might do better with it than,
um, or had a, had a more of a use, um, than they did.
Uh, it's worth several thousand dollars.
Uh, it's, um, it's a a it's a nice, um, vehicle
and, uh, we're gonna get a lot of use out of it.
So anyway, I just wanted to call out the housing authority.
It's very much, very much appreciated.
Thank you. Yes. What's The capacity of that van?
Oh, It's a 16 seater.
16. Wow. Oh wow.
That's a good gift. Yeah. Any comments online?
No. Thank you very much.
Um, I just thought maybe we should give a quick plug
to when this documentary is going to be shown
by the South Portland Water Resources Protection,
um, department.
I've heard this is a really interesting documentary.
It was made in Portland, so when
and where we should call attention to that.
Um, the date has been set. I'm looking at the memo.
The date has been set Friday, February 20th.
Um, the plan is
to have the film shown at the library South Portland Public
Library's main branch.
And again, I've heard this is fascinating. So
You see a time, I don't see a time there.
Oh, no, I didn't see the time either.
I think we can assume it will be shown in the evening.
Um, yeah, I don't see the time,
but, um, stay tuned.
And I would say check the library or the city's website
and the, for further information
and probably the library's website as well.
So all, do we have a roll call?
Vote on this motion.
Oh, did we have a motion? I'm sorry. I've lost track.
Motion for passage on this one, please. Counselor Walker.
Thank you so much. Second counselor Scott making her move.
Thank you very much. Roll call vote please.
Counselor, unless you Oh, I'm so sorry.
I forgot that you might have something to say.
I just wanted to thank the members of our community
and for the businesses in our community
who have made these donations to make this possible
and to help the residents of our city
Counselor. Scott, thank
you. Same. The same. Thank you very much.
And yes, thank you to all these donors. Okay.
Now can we have that roll call vote Counselor Coleman? Yes.
Counselor Pride. Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker. Yes. Counselor West. Yes.
And Mayor Tipton? Yes. Thank you.
Alright, everyone, we have reached the point in our meeting
where we're going to have the workshop we had originally
planned to hear last week, or was it two weeks ago?
I'm losing track. Last week. Last week.
Um, and we're going to hear it now
and it's an important one.
And thank you Milan.
Okay. Permission.
Um, thank you Mary Tipton.
So, uh, we, uh, have been talking to the council
for a a few weeks
and this has come up in a number
of planning conversations from their conference plan
to other, uh, sessions.
Uh, so I'm, I'm glad we have
an opportunity to bring this forward.
It's not moving into full screen, so I might stay as is.
Um, the legislature's been quite busy on the housing front.
Um, I think every year in the last few years,
we've brought a bunch of edits forward through, usually
through miscellaneous amends.
Um, but a couple of years ago, uh, with the passage
of LD 2003, we scheduled a workshop
because there was just a lot
to discuss within the package of amendments.
Um, and we're following the same vein here.
Some of these statutory changes give some latitude
for the city to make certain decisions.
Either the statute's unclear and we want to set precedent
or at least take, uh, a path forward.
Um, and we, we need to know the council's,
you know, comfortable with that approach.
Or the legislature just formally said,
you can do this or that.
And, uh, you know, sort of up
to the local municipality to decide.
So there's things to discuss.
So, um, you saw some, uh, pretty cut
and dry, uh, amendments at the state level
that just brought, got brought forward
through miscellaneous amendments.
We are gonna, we're gonna be doing that again for, um, some
of the bill measures that kick in in July.
Um, so there'll be some of those two, the little, uh,
housekeeping type items
that we just don't have any discretion on.
Um, but then there's areas where we do need to dive in.
Um, so several mandates were passed.
Some limited modifications are expected.
In the second session, which is currently, uh, going on,
we expect February would actually settle this matter,
but technically we have, uh, possibly until April 15th
until we know, um, what's what with the amendment bills.
And so, um, in this process, we're workshopping it now
so we can get your guidance,
but by the time we come forward to you
with the actual formable ordinance amendments, we expect
to know, um, the ends of the, uh,
amendments that were passed or,
or maybe aren't going to get passed.
Um, so South Portland is on track for both, you know,
meeting the July deadline
and for, uh, being able to marry up with any
of those amendments that are ongoing.
So just want you all to be clear on that.
And then spring, summer is when we present the edits
and be in time for July 1st.
Um, compliance, um, things come up.
So I will just mention, and I know I've said this before,
but you know, if we don't pass it by July 1st,
it's still state law, so we will be enforcing it.
It's not like the sky's gonna fall down,
but we should be, you know, ahead of this stuff.
And it's important and it's been a council, uh, goal
to stay on top of housing.
And this is the latest, um, I will share, um, the reason
that there's more urgency
for things like these edits versus other statutory
provisions that have changed, which we also like to keep up
with, is that we're routinely having conversations with, uh,
you know, these bills and whether developers are gonna be
able to utilize them or not.
So, um, you know, we, we have more, more
to do than bandwidth to actually get done.
But when bills come forward
and people are regularly asking about them,
we try to stay on top of those.
So, um, spring 2027, we have our, uh,
housing ordinance amendment number two, um, which is more
or less the requirements that are, um,
gonna kick in not July of this, uh, year, but July of 2027.
So we do expect kind of to come back at you, um,
with another round of miscellaneous amendments.
Even even later than that.
Some of these bills don't kick in until the 2027 timeframe.
Um, all right, so for the package that you just saw,
the miscellaneous amendments, I summarized all of those,
these five bullets.
Just reiterate that.
Um, those are captured in there
and we'll be talking about everything else,
uh, in this workshop.
Uh, so May 13th is when we
expect the planning board hearing.
May 19th, um, we'll be back to council
and that'll get us, uh, on board for July, um, passage.
The, um, elements of 1829
that really weren't council discussion here relate
to the new minimum lock size provisions
that they've required.
The maximum residential density provisions, which, um,
for us are often tied to minimum lock sizes.
And then the approval process for middle density housing.
This is the terminology and statute.
Uh, so the modifying minimum lot size requirements, uh,
the minimum lot size every zone establishes.
Um, if it wants to, uh, a minimum lot size that's required.
And that just means that you must have a,
if you're gonna create new lots,
you must make them at least this large.
Um, we've done so for decades for, um, a very long time.
Not all of our zones require a minimum lot size.
Um, some of them purposely, they're sort
of in our urban zones and they just look at the form
and the, the structure, uh, to define
how big the lot should be.
And we just don't control development
through the establishment of a minimum lot.
But it's a pretty common one.
Um, anything smaller than
that which may have been created in the past
or those legal non-conforming lots, these tables just show
what our current, uh, lot standards are.
These were developed in the 2015 timeframe.
Um, and what the planning department had done at
that time was take a look at all of our, uh, neighborhoods
and using GIS, um,
and some, uh, you know, estimation and whatnot.
Uh, figured out what was the typical lot size for
that neighborhood, and then enshrined that in ordinance
and say that, you know, you can be in a zone that spans, uh,
multiple neighborhoods of the city
and even in one zone you can have different minimum lot size
standards because you happen
to be in Thornton Heights versus cash corner.
Um, and the prevailing pattern
is different in each of those.
So we have actually quite a nuanced minimum lot size
for our two biggest districts.
The AA and the A district,
those are largely single family residential districts,
so relatively benign land use,
but we're quite in the weeds, um,
and detailed as far as how we regulate minimum lots.
Um, but then several of our other districts,
like our G residential district,
you often see housing projects proposed there.
Um, the recently adopted RC district,
they have different standards.
We range from, uh, somewhere around 6,000 to well above
or, uh, 80,000 I think is our highest, uh, number.
Um, and so all of those are inconsistent with
where the state law has now been, uh, landing on this issue.
Um, so first the new section 43 64 A,
the minimum lots cannot exceed 5,000 square feet.
If someone wants to create a new lot, they can do
so at 5,000 square feet.
If the property
that they're talking about is within a comprehensive plan
growth area and, oh, excuse me,
or it has access to public water and sewer.
So it can be any really any one
of those three right growth area, sewer
or water for South Portland, the easy thing
to analyze is sewer.
'cause we covered most of the city with sewer.
So we did some mapping to figure out, um, which parts
of town are actually going to be affected by this.
And, uh, hopefully the yellow is coming through there,
but it's virtually every single property.
Uh, it's not just that you have to have public sewer, it's
that you also have to be basically readily available
to connect to public sewer.
Um, and that is within 200 feet of a sewer service area.
So once you apply that buffer,
and given the extent of our network,
it's virtually the entire city.
One assumption, uh, underlying in here
and how we've approached this, um,
policy language is rather than have a whole bunch
of footnotes for the small cases of septic systems
or, uh, public wells that we have, um, looking at this map,
I think it's, um, simple
and straightforward enough
that we should just apply the citywide, um,
and have some of the other provisions
that state allows either controls.
So, um, we have an extensive sewer network.
All the yellow parcels are within that area.
5,000 square foot minimum lots would apply in any zone
that allows residential land uses, which is all
of our residential zone mixed use zones.
And then, um, historically we've allowed residential
and quite a large number of the more heavily commercial and,
and even some of our industrial zones allow residential.
Um, so it's in all the districts
that allow residential will, uh, have
that 5,000 square foot minimum block size.
Um, the maximum residential density provision, uh,
of 1829 states that, um,
we have to allow a certain number
of units on those 5,000 square foot lots.
Um, and today we don't do that today.
We sometimes say you can have the number of units that is,
you know, your how big your lot is
and how many times of the minimum lot size you
have in your lot.
Um, and other times we prescribe a number.
Uh, so for example, in the residential DG G district,
if you have a 14,712 square foot lot
to 18,317 square feet, you get three units on that property.
So sometimes we prescribe it in a number, um,
other districts like the VR districts do it similarly.
Other times it's a ratio, um,
like two units per acre or whatever.
Um, the statute is saying this is 43 64 A, uh,
really it cares about up to four units.
Um, that's the upper limit.
So we, we understand they're not just allowing a whole new
density, they're just saying that
small scale housing projects,
we wanna grease the wheels on those.
And so, uh, what we're now going to be required to do is,
um, for a legal minimum lot,
that's the 5,000 square feet we just talked about.
If that parcel happens to be in a growth area,
and this is important this time, it's,
and, um, so in a growth area
and it's near those public services, um,
and it has to be both public water and sewer.
Again, in South Portland, it's virtually everywhere.
So really the control in this case is whether it's in a
growth area, we have to allow four units on
that 5,000 square feet.
Okay? It could be attached or detached.
Um, and then if someone's proposing a fifth, sixth,
or whatever number of extra units,
then we carry forward whatever the council's adopted
as the density in the district.
So if you have a lot size that, um,
if we did our math today on the density
and it would allow five units, this, uh, new provision
and law is meaningless for you
because your lot under our calculations
already allows the five.
Um, but if your, uh, parcel, uh, was such a size
that our ordinance, you've got 5,000 square feet,
you're on water and you're on sewer, you happen
to be on outer highland, which in 2012 was in a growth area.
Um, and your parcel only technically would compute
to allowing one unit today, you could do up
to four units under this statute.
So it does change things depending on, um, you know,
what our density calculations are.
The four units is inclusive of ADUs,
which is actually harmonized.
I think they were looking at South Portland policy
when they drafted this.
Uh, it's harmonized with where we're at on ADUs
because you may recall we can host an A DU
with a single family, a duplex or a triplex.
Yes, if you have a triplex
or three units on a property, one
of those can be the primary or principle to the A DU.
So you get to four units that way.
So the four units is inclusive of the ADU EDUs, um,
the statute then deviates if you're
outside of a growth area.
Um, but you have those services of water and sewer.
Um, so again, this now
with the other provision now covers every
circumstance in South Portland.
You're outside of the growth area
and you have those services.
You are only forced to allow two units on the 5,000,
uh, instead of the four.
And the statute says that what we have
to allow is an attached concept.
So, uh, where we have a, I don't know, uh,
8,000 square foot lot out in country gardens,
minimum lot size is quite large.
Our numbers today would say you can only
put a single family there.
And then we have our A DU provisions.
This statute would say, well you're outside
of a growth area, your country gardens,
but you've got water and sewer.
And so we are gonna require you to allow two units on there.
And then they can also host the A DU.
So the A DU is additional, uh, to the two units.
Um, so the growth area designation matters,
and I have some maps
and illustrations to just show you visually what areas
of town kind of work differently within these provisions.
Um, we have two zones that are, uh, less restrictive than
what the statute already allows.
So some of our, our zones are just allow a high level
of density and really wouldn't be touched
or affected by these ordinances.
But all of our other zones
that allow residential are gonna be affected, um,
because we have some relatively rural
or suburban density standards in, in the city.
And at least if you calculate it on a,
on the first four units basis, the state, um,
provisions are more dense.
Good here. Okay, so, uh,
hopefully these colors, uh, show up.
This is a map that illustrates under the existing 2012
comprehensive plan.
Um, we mapped all the growth areas versus the, uh, uh, areas
that would fall into the non-growth category.
Um, this is not filtered, uh, for the zones
that don't allow residential.
So I just want to, uh, call out here, uh, these big xs
for instance illustrate areas
where we currently don't allow residential.
The office park on GAT is the professional office zone
doesn't allow residential.
The main mall CCR zone doesn't allow residential,
the light industrial, the airport area zone,
and the heavy industrial INR zone,
those technically don't allow it.
So even though they're shade, it just
mined that they don't allow.
And then of course, uh, I wanna make sure not to forget
to name this one, shipyard does not allow residential.
So it's unaffected by, um, these provisions of 1829,
but everywhere else in the city, um, the two tones,
the yellow versus the brown
or rust color, um, they're saying which one is the growth,
um, area and which one is the non-growth area?
Which one will require four units to be permitted?
Which one will require two units to be permitted?
So here's that country gardens, uh, example here.
Hopefully you can see it with my cursor.
Um, yellow means it's going to force, uh, two units
to be allowed there.
Someone may also choose to host, um, an A DU
and make it three units if, if they wanted to build maximum
that the statute provides.
And then under the four unit scenario,
like something like our CS zone,
save oaks allows residential, um,
this is maybe a bad example to point to
'cause the CS has unlimited density,
so it's technically unaffected, but a zone like that,
'cause it's a growth area, would be required
to allow at least four.
So this one is a color coding, um,
of the provisions of 1829 in comparison
to our 2040 draft, uh, growth areas.
Just 'cause we're on the cusp here of talking about that.
Just so you're my, you know, aware.
Um, we've actually, uh,
shrunken the growth areas of town.
Um, one of the big reasons is in 2012 the model
for development was these single family detached subdivision
lots on greenfield development.
Um, and that was what drove things like our outer highland,
uh, area, all those single family
homes that got built out there.
This was what we considered growth
and what kind of growth we wanted, uh, in the past.
And, uh, today the growth is concentrated in more
urbanized or denser areas.
Uh, things like the inland tank farm, which may, you know,
convert and we want to allow for infill,
uh, in those kinds of areas.
And we've, uh, sort
of sheltered the single family residential on the outskirts
and tried to focus our development along corridors
where infrastructure is most robust and that kind of thing.
Uh, so technically we've shrunken the footprint
of 1820 nine's impact, at least in the sense
of two versus four units.
Um, but this is what that map looks like
and it's, you know, all along our, our corridors
and then in some of our bigger, um, infill housing areas,
they would be expected to see four units.
Um, what I didn't really do is allow
or assign more analysis to this
because, uh, for instance, the main mall area, the, um,
the density that's in the draft comp plan policy is saying a
minimum of 20 units per acre.
So it's the policy guidance in our comp plan is actually far
more aggressive than 1829 in the places
where we want to see growth.
And that notably is main malls, Sable Oaks
and the, our downtown area.
And then we're probably pretty close to that
with things like our inland tank farm, um,
redevelopment vision and, and that sort of thing.
So I don't think
that 1829 necessarily is introducing something new, um,
that the 2040 draft comp plan isn't already contemplating.
So really the the difference is going
to be in things like the purple, the darker, um, tone there,
um, where two units must be allowed.
The comp plan policy says
that all neighborhoods will contribute to housing.
And our vision has been that, uh,
single family neighborhoods will continue
to provide for housing.
But in that format, you know, single family homes,
maybe they're not on 20,000 square foot lots,
but on 10,000 square foot lots.
Um, in this case, uh, the statute says
that we can't preclude the development of duplexes.
If someone wants to do an attached, uh,
the statute's gonna require that.
So we can't quite achieve that policy vision
that we had in mind.
Um, but the actual number of units that's involved here is
it's not dramatic, uh, even if we're purple areas.
Um, so what staff in light of the, the statutory language,
what staff is proposing that we do, is that we retain, um,
and don't touch the densities that we've already assigned
and, you know, we are comfortable with
and is basically what the council has decided,
the densities are appropriate for town.
Of course, when the comp plan is passed,
we'll be doing an overhaul and amending those,
but that's sort of isolated.
We're not gonna change our course
because of what the statute says.
So we'll just assign densities,
and that will be what state recommends as our base density.
So again, once we go beyond the four units
that they require are base density kick in.
Okay. Um, we recommend that we allow up to four units
as prescribed, uh, in state law, in growth areas
where you're service to sewer, we would just do that
through, through a simple footnote.
Um, in those space bulk tables, that's an easy edit.
Um, and then one important thing is that, um,
we do recommend that we allow a detached version
of two unit requirements.
So the statute said, when you're required to do two units,
because you're outside of a growth area,
you must allow an attached version, the attached duplex.
But if someone comes in
and wants to say, I have a single family home,
now this state law provision allows me a second unit,
I don't want to do it as an attached unit, I want to do it
as a detached, um, separate single family home.
Uh, why do we, um, why would we not allow that scenario?
So we're recommending that we allow detached or attached
and let the homeowner decide how they want
to allow for that second unit.
Uh, just a couple of examples to take a look at, like
what outcomes, um, would be, we ran some tables.
So for instance, in the AA residential zoning district,
it's a LUTs field neighborhood.
Um, it's not in a growth area.
The minimum lot size today is 8,500.
It would be forced to be 5,000.
Um, going forward, because of that first section of LD 1829,
the base density, or what we currently assign is a density
of units per acre.
Just using common metrics here, or,
or a consistent metric would be 5.1 units per acre.
So today, if someone came forward, I would tell them
that you can do one unit plus an A DU, um,
under the statute, uh, you can do two units plus an 80 unit.
Um, if we went to the, a District of Country Gardens
or Ocean Street, um, uh, that were not in a growth area,
similarly, just different minimum lot sizes here, 12,500
or 8,000, they'd be forced to be 5,000.
But very similar outcomes. It used to be just single family.
Maybe you can get an A DU now it's two units plus a DU.
There's a section of the Ocean Street neighborhood
that's in the same zone.
The a zone that happens to be in a growth area, that one,
same thing, minimum lot size would go from eight to 5,000.
Um, but the new statutory provision will
allow it to go to four.
So, uh, maximum build out as a result of statute would be,
um, going from two units.
If you build with the A DU to four units, uh,
in the g zoning district, the neighborhood doesn't matter.
Uh, it's that table of based on lot
size, how many units you get.
But the G zone, uh, does require 7,500 minimum lot sizes.
So those would shrink. Um,
and then the density is actually derivative
of your lot size, uh, requirement.
So today, if you happen to have a 6,500 square foot lot, um,
you could do a single family plus a DU.
In our infill higher density was supposed
to be our higher density residential zone.
Um, you would get the same outcomes,
but under the statute, if you're in
or out of a growth area, you'd get four
or two plus the A DU.
So there are some, some different outcomes there.
Um, if we took an example
of a slightly larger lot at 10,000 square feet, we start,
we see very, very similar outcomes just
because of our minimum lot sizes.
So where it starts to really change, um, is in the small
lots, okay?
And the very large, uh, or slightly larger lots,
because in this scenario of 20,000 square feet, once you go
beyond what the statutory provision requires, then you get
to enjoy the base density on that remainder.
So beyond 5,000 feet,
you have 15,000 feet remaining square feet remaining
because your minimum lot size is 5,000,
and you have to allow potentially up to four units on that.
And then your 15,000 square feet would be compared against
your, um, city adopted density requirements.
So there's an intersection here,
just depends on the project scope, the lot size of
what people are proposing.
I think in most circumstances on the east side of town, um,
this small lot scenario is really
what we're gonna be encountering.
And then as we move to the west side of town where lots,
lots start to get bigger, we start to get more
of the commercial districts with larger lots.
Uh, we might see a combination
of the statue plus space density determining how people
can utilize their lots to the maximum
for residential development.
Um, okay, so the third section, the, what we wanted
to highlight for you tonight is this modifying the approval
process for the under four unit projects.
This, um, the state has now mandated that we have to go
through a more streamlined review
and we cannot, um, require a planning board level
of review today.
And for many, many years under our zoning ordinance,
we kept single family homes separated
and had them go through a building permit
only construction track.
They never had to speak to
the planning board or the planning office.
One exception to that is on non-conforming lots of record.
If they're less than the, uh, allowed
or the minimum required lock size, then they have to go
to the planning board for additional scrutiny.
The statute now says two to four units,
um, can't go to the board.
Um, we still have all those application
requirements that we go through.
And importantly, when we process a project to the board,
the applicant gives us everything that we need in order
to determine compliance with the zoning ordinance
and any other ordinances that are applicable.
We have to do the abutter noticing one week in advance
of the hearing, and then we hold the public hearing.
And at the public hearing, as you know, um, members
of the public are given 30 or three minutes to speak.
Um, under the statute, the board cannot have a role except
for other standards that we may choose to enforce.
So in places like Portland
where they have a historic district
and really detailed historic design guidelines,
they would still be, um, able
to have 1, 2, 3, 4 unit projects go to the planning board if
that's how their ordinance is written
and approve those specialized standards.
We have design district standards in certain prescribed
zoning districts.
We never really get one to three,
four size developments there,
but if we did, what would happen is we'd have
to have staff level review
to get their entitlement to build four units.
And then we could just say the design
of those four units is now under
the scrutiny of the planning board.
And they'll, they'll go ahead and review
how you, how you're gonna build those.
But the planning board has no jurisdiction
to say you can't do four units
because we can't find compliance with our standards
for the fourth unit or something like that.
Um, so it doesn't override things like shoreland zoning, uh,
flood, uh, resilience zoning, be existing
or soon to be adopted, um,
post resilience overlay zoning, for instance.
We fall in that category or if we had design districts.
So we still can apply a certain planning board
oversight if we wanted to.
Um,
so we have a, our proposed amendment, um,
Has some options for you to consider
and we're making a recommendation for you.
But I would like to discuss these
and see if counsel has any sensitivity to it.
Staff level review, we did a, um, uh, a survey of,
um, other jurisdictions that are similar to South Portland.
So we looked at Portland, Westbrook, Scarborough, um,
Lewiston, Auburn, and Bangor, I believe.
So trying to grab the similar scale
and maybe some similar context as well.
Um, and all across the state, uh,
there is staff level review for certain projects
that we currently send to the planning board.
So some of these cities are already instituting a version of
what the state's asking us to do.
And in general, there's sort of three flavors to this
that people have chosen, um, over the decades to do.
One is that we just simply have no planning board
involvement at all, or planning division, um,
and staff involvement at all.
It's just like what we do with single family homes.
It's a construction and,
and building permit request, code enforcement processes.
It. That's it. Um, we process ADUs like this
where the code enforcement office has a prescriptive list
of standards for ADUs.
Uh, for example, you can't put the mechanical equipment
right next to your, um, in your setback area
because we know ADUs are close to the setback area.
And so we adopted that standard.
So code enforcement, they go through a zoning clearance,
they check it all off, it's pretty black
and white standards are very objective.
There's no analytical work involved.
Um, so once they get that, they get their zoning clearance
and then they move straight to construction permitting.
So that's one approach, code enforcement only.
Uh, the second approach is having planning
or zoning staff involvement.
And that takes generally two forms.
One is that there's a staff committee,
and this is typically in smaller towns
or I think I would argue less sophisticated towns, um,
where they would want to have their code director,
public works director, police, uh, chief fire chief, um,
and their zoning administrators sit all together
and they vote in the same way
that a planning board would vote.
They all have to agree, um,
that the project is okay by that.
Um, and then the final is
that we have a designated zoning administrator,
which is one individual who makes these decisions.
Um, and towns can do this with or without a public hearing
or an allowance for public comment.
But really this is one authority, um,
who's needing to make the decision.
They need to take the input,
just like a planning board would take the input, make, uh,
an assessment of all that content, and then make a decision
and stand by that decision whatever path we choose.
I just want to emphasize this point.
Any chance I get the review protocol
and the standards are the same.
Um, when we go to the planning board, this applicants deal
with staff for an extended period of time
to make sure all their technical material is there,
that their application can demonstrate compliance
with every single standard that we have.
They don't get to a hearing until we can tell 'em
that you are complete.
You've provided evidence, election evidence on every one
of our applicable standards
because the board's role is qua quasi judicial.
They don't, don't make a clause.
They have to interpret the laws.
They have to read what the law says
and find an evidence that says the project complies.
If they can do that, they need to pass the project.
Um, and so we will do that same process.
And in that process, when an application comes in, it goes
to about 30 plus people.
Um, all the department heads
and some of our third party reviewers,
and they all weigh in.
We compile the information, we vet it, clean it, um,
and understand the project in light of the comments,
tell the applicant what they have to fix or amend.
They come back. If they fix it amended properly,
the project is approvable.
All of that would still happen.
It's now a question of whether
or not that now goes to the code director, whether
that now goes to a committee of staff
or whether that goes to a zoning administrator,
uh, to make the decision.
Um, I will get back to this protocol in in a second.
I just wanna summarize the edits, uh,
and amendments we have to get in line with.
The final, um, piece is LD 9 97, uh,
which says that all, uh, we have
to allow residential uses in commercial zones.
And this comes, uh, into effect July 1st, 2027.
So this is the one that we'll, we'll come back
to you in about a year's time
and be talking about miscellaneous
amendments for this provision.
Um, there are several pieces to this legislation
that are still unclear.
Um, they're both rulemaking
and, um, some amendment bills that are gonna try
and address the very obvious issues in the way
that it's worded initially.
Um, we don't know what commercial zones means, for instance,
is that, uh, inclusive of industrial areas or not?
That's one that actually has already been clarified,
but there's been, it was pretty fast and loose.
I think with this bill it got passed.
There's some cleanup that needs to happen.
There's no reason. In fact, I would caution against, uh,
not waiting as long as we possibly can to make sure
that this is tested and cleaned up, uh, as much as possible.
Um, so we're not doing anything with this one,
but be aware that it's sort of on the horizon.
Um, it does allow for certain local controls
that I think are very important to South Portland.
And I want to emphasize here, one is that even
where we allow residential
and commercial zones, we can require buffering.
We already do fences or vegetative buffering
or some other separation, um, buffering
for things like noise and vibration
and, and other nuisances.
We can control site
and building layout, which we already do.
And then importantly, I think for us, um, we can not do this
or continue to prohibit residential in areas
where we see flood or other natural hazard risks.
Um, so, you know,
we're working on an overlay zone for our coastal areas.
We can choose to restrict in commercial areas, residential,
um, because there is flood risk if we wanted to, uh,
six commercial zones would be effective
because several of our commercial zones
already allow residential.
And those are the CG
and the CCR district, um, really are our main mall area.
The professional office district is that Dan Drive.
We, uh, CCRT is over by Target.
Um, the Broadway corridor, uh, is right here, um,
adjacent Mill Creek Park on Broadway.
And then the, um,
commercial armory zones sort of a single purpose zone.
Um, but it technically is commercial
and it doesn't allow, uh, residential.
So those are the ones that would really be affected by it.
Um, the IL light industrial shipyard
and the INR districts we know would
not be required to do this.
Um, some, some of them we can choose not to
because of the flood risk, but also, uh,
they have industrial uses
and we already understand that that's not
gonna be included in commercial.
So we're, we're not gonna be,
our hand is not gonna be forced in those districts.
So our proposed amendment is
that we don't do anything at this time, um,
until we can get all of that, uh, you know, updates and,
and rulemaking in place.
And then we'd be coming back to you with a custom approach
for South Portal, um,
Milan. So
Yes, I'm just wondering how close we
Are. About
two slides.
Thank You. Um, I wanna speak to the upper limit
of potential stress for, you know,
on the community from additional development.
Um, it's really hard to predict
because what this statute is meant
to allow is small scale housing production on smaller lots,
um, to allow for that infill housing mix.
Um, and in order for that to happen, we really need to see,
and I think you've heard me say this
before, several things come together.
Um, in order to allow someone to do that, they have
to have the money, the space, the physical design criteria
that they have need to be met, um, and so on and so forth.
Uh, there are a couple of things that we looked at to see
what could be like on aggregate
the impact to South Portland.
And I think there are two important controls
that you should be mindful of.
When we did the 2022 housing assessment report, um,
they analyzed for our whole region
how much housing we really need
to supply in South Portland in order to meet demand.
Um, and demand varies based on your income level.
We certainly need more in the low, uh, income category
because the market's not providing it.
But on gross, there was a certain number
of housing units that we had to provide.
It was somewhere around 2300.
Um, and then the state a year later did a similar report
for the entire state
and also looked at the Portland, uh, region,
and they did their own analysis
and they came up with that number
of 84,000 units across the state need to be produced.
You may remember that number using both
of those projections.
Um, for South Portland
and the numbers that we did just on a town basis,
we would need to increase our production or,
or increase our conversion rate of single family homes
to additional, uh, duplex or triplex homes at a 10% rate.
So if 10% of our properties added in one more unit,
or maybe a smaller percentage added in two more units
and got to triplexes instead of single families,
we would be meeting all of our housing demand.
There wouldn't be additional people looking
for additional housing, the numbers would be met.
Um, and the cog study,
or the, uh, excuse me, the state study
for the metro region found that that number was around 12%
for the, uh, greater Portland area.
Um, what that's telling us is
that if people aren't in the business of building housing,
just for it to sit vacant, um, and we have controls
and maybe we need to tighten our controls on things like
short term rental, um,
but just for what people want to build, for people
to be housed in them long term,
we're really looking at 10% conversion.
Now, where that 10% occurs is an important question.
People are obviously gonna gravitate
to certain areas versus others.
Um, and that's not something
that we can necessarily predict.
Um, but right now it's, it's not an enormous number.
Uh, and even if in a relatively short timeframe, five
to 10 years we were able to achieve that 10%,
we would be providing the housing that that is in demand,
um, and our infrastructure
and services are not, um, you know, in a condition
where they would break down, uh,
because of that additional new housing that's there.
So we recommend that we can keep up with this
through our normal capital improvement planning process.
When we come to you with budgets,
we assess strain on our system.
You know, what do we need to do with storm water?
What do we need to do with traffic?
What do we need to do with sewer?
Um, and that process is effective at handling
what this set of statutes is gonna open us up to.
Um, so counsel discussion, quick summary
and what I'm asking for your guidance on, um, number one,
neighborhood character.
Um, we have to allow one tube potentially up to four units,
uh, within some of our single family zones in the comp plan.
We're recommending that we try
to keep the character of those areas.
It is possible for us to allow, um, those units,
but then, uh, develop some standards
that would encourage those units to look
and feel more compatible with single family homes.
One very obvious example I'll just offer is, for instance,
if you're gonna build a duplex, you can build it,
but you can only have one main door facing the street,
so it looks like one entry
and then the split happens inside or behind that door.
Um, so simple things like that we can adopt in order to try
and continue, uh, this concept
of the single family character if the council
chooses or desires.
A second piece is that, um, some
of our residential zones do not have a maximum,
uh, lot coverage.
And it's because they're single family zones,
they never really had to worry about it.
Everyone wanted a yard. We didn't have
to adopt the standard under this.
There's gonna be more parking required,
there's potentially gonna be more use of the land.
There's the council is interested, we can
be more aggressive on the lot coverage maximum.
Um, just be mindful, this will protect land.
This will make it so that you build smaller footprints,
maybe encouraged to do more duplexes, some triplexes so
that you don't disturb as much land,
but it does sort of play at odds
with the single family character piece
because we'll get more duplexes
and triplexes if you wanna be really
aggressive with that standard.
So these two characteristics I think I'd love
to hear your input on.
Do you really feel, um, we need to try
and do as much as we can to reinforce the single family
design character of our prevailing single family districts.
This is just some visuals to, you know,
help illustrate the point.
Um, these are some triplexes in traditional neighborhoods,
you can have different opinions about whether
they fit or don't fit.
Um, but the elements that don't fit, uh, we would look
to isolate those in
design standards and say, you can't do that.
Um, maybe the porches have to be on the back, maybe the,
again, the front door can only be one.
Um, so do we want to be more aggressive on lot coverage?
Um, if we're more aggressive,
we protect more land from development,
but we encourage more consolidated housing,
do you want those design controls?
Uh, or do you wanna see a version of those design controls?
And then finally, do you have a preference on the way we
review at a staff level, the 1, 2 3
or the 2, 3, 4, uh, sized dwelling projects?
Um, I might just park it there
and if there's more discussion
to be had about the way we do the staff level review,
I'm happy to dive into it, the exact protocols.
Um, there is some nuance there,
but I think I've talked for long enough
and wanna give you guys an opportunity to wait.
Thank you very much, Milan. It's important information.
It's challenging to take it in when you don't live
and breathe this, at least speaking for me.
Um, guess what, counselors, there's a public pop quiz now.
Milan's gonna grill each of us and ask what we've learned.
Okay. Um, no, do you have questions for Milan?
Councillor West has a question.
So how does this interface
with the setback requirements in our zoning?
It, Uh, it doesn't, it doesn't override any of those.
So we would continue to be able to enforce our setbacks.
And then with, and then parking.
What'd you say about parking?
So there, there was a, a amendment in another section
of 1829 that now says it's one space per dwelling unit.
Some of our zones, like our G Zone,
required a guest parking space.
We can't do that anymore.
Uh, so the legislature did some work there,
so they've either gotten aligned with
what our most common applied parking standard is
and then not gone so far as we did in some sections.
So for instance, if we have small, uh, apartment units,
like 600 square foot apartments,
they actually have a reduced parking standard
already in our ordinance.
The legislature didn't do anything about that,
so they just took away our more excessive parking
requirements, like in our G zone.
Since this is a workshop, are we allowed to comment?
What are we just supposed to just ask?
I think you can go crazy and make a comment.
Yes, thank you.
I always try to put these in the context
of my own experience with our own properties,
and I just wanna say, I think it's gonna be it very,
very difficult to design four units
on a 5,000 square foot parcel with parking
and meeting our setback requirements.
So I don't think we're gonna see a lot
of this happening, frankly.
So don't be writing me out there
and telling me this is the end of the world
with this new state law because it's just not that simple.
I I you have a question? Thank you. Counselor
Walker, um, design controls.
Can you talk a little bit more about, maybe,
maybe this would be more something I should research alone,
but just kind of the unintended consequences of not
applying design controls if we were
to do something like this just broadly.
Um, I guess, uh, you know, I
maybe have to admit some personal bias in trying to answer
that question because like these images for instance,
they don't, they don't startle me.
If this was next door to a property I own,
I wouldn't have the reaction that this is, you know,
taking away property value
or, you know, significantly damaging me or,
or you know, how I experience my neighborhood.
Um, but being a planning director, this is
what I routinely hear at public hearings that, you know,
I bought this house, I wanted a quiet single family home
next to another quiet single family home.
There's a whole series of things that people associate with
what a single family home is.
Um, you know,
and if we don't have any design controls,
then someone could go in and I would argue, you know,
this image down below is probably looks more like a
multi-family than this image right above it
and argue, um, maybe people are more comfortable
with the one above than the one below.
Maybe there's a sweet spot,
maybe there's certain things we can do.
Like that single entry piece.
I say that one because for instance, when we had, uh, a DU
allowances first legalized in South Portland, which wasn't
that long ago, um, we had a whole host of design criteria.
And one of the things was that you couldn't have, uh,
two entries along visible from the street facade.
And people were worried that, okay, you got an a DU now
and suddenly I'm living next to a duplex
and you know, it's not car, not the neighborhood I know.
Um, and so we used to require all ADUs to have side access
or access through the garage or access through the rear.
Um, so things like this are doable.
They're easily seen on a plan, um,
understandable by applicants.
Um, and they speak to some
of the concerns we hear in the neighborhood of
what people are looking for their neighborhood to be.
So it's definitely a subjective thing.
It's a design, uh, piece.
Uh, I don't think anything, um, you know,
like a worst case,
real material impact, you know, on people.
That's not something we need to brace for.
This is really like a preference.
And do we have, we have an architecture that we wanna try
and emphasize that's in that category.
Thank you. Other questions?
Questions? I feel like my question's more
of a history question that we should be at the, which is
why when we know that throughout New England,
especially in areas that needed to attract workers,
and even in Portland there are many, you know,
triple Deckers built and definitely, um, duplexes.
Why is it that South Portland developed less of that?
I wonder, but as I said, it's more of a history question.
You don't necessarily have
to answer it unless you know the answer.
Um, yeah, I think there's, there's quite a bit of evidence
to show that the, the financial
and lending markets had a lot to do with
that single family homes on detached lots
with a dedicated drive driveway.
And if you're really lucky, a, a garage that was the,
you know, the gold standard for an investment product.
Um, and there was a lot of energy put into making
that the norm, both culturally, the thing
that everybody desires, the kind
of epitome of what you shoot for.
Um, you know, there's decades
and decades of that, this kind of notion
of the, you know, Pleasantville.
Um, and,
and I, I think it then starts
to manifest into what people want.
But you know, there's different cultures
where they've always encouraged
and, you know, more urbanized the triplexes and and whatnot.
And that's been something that they desire.
Um, so, you know, this is a cultural thing.
Um, but there are some forces that, you know,
moved it in certain directions than others.
Uh, when we adopted the, you know, lot, minimum lot sizes
that we have in our ordinance today, you know,
I often wonder, 'cause you look at places like Ferry
Village, Willard's and,
and so on those areas were subdivided at 4,000
to 5,000 square foot lots.
Many of the corner properties are mixed use developments.
Um, there's duplexes and triplexes throughout interspersed.
Before we had zoning, people just did the stuff
and no one really cared.
And now it's charming. Um, so, you know, it ebbs
and flows with taste, I guess.
Um, um,
but there are, there are some reasons why we,
we did tend towards that kind
of single family detached norm for many years.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. 'cause I was gonna say, I,
I live meeting House Hill area, but I walk
and we have a lot PLE Street.
There are several duplexes, two entrances,
but they're, they're balanced there.
Um, two of them, the doors
of the front doors have painted the same one.
It's not, it's a little more.
And then there are two homes that I had no one look,
I thought it was a single family bungalow, but it's
because it has one door and splits inside.
Uh, until I knew the owner,
I always thought it was a single family home.
Yeah, it's so, and there are several
Triple Deckers walking around
And you know, we're, we're going,
I know the council recently got an email about this.
We're going through a very real experience of this right now
with the Cornal Street redevelopment.
There's single family homes products sold
for very different price point than the town home
or the attached for owner or for rental version.
Um, demand is wildly different
and the price points are wildly different.
Even if you do a per square foot, you know, comparison.
It's just, you know, there's, there's one
that's more desired than other.
Alright. Um, thank you.
I think, is there anyone who wants to make a comment on
what Milan has presented?
I don't see anyone here.
Is there anyone online who would like to do that?
Alright, well then we should try
to get you some answers to your questions.
So you may have to,
or at least some reactions to your questions. Again,
Essentially, do you agree
with the staff recommendation about the lot coverage,
the design control staff review?
And, and if not,
is there any additional guidance you might want to give us?
Okay. Can Melon, did you had that?
Did you have all the questions up on? Yes, there they are.
So here's one and one and two
and then the three, this just poses some questions,
but really where staff's recommending is, um,
I think our best approach here is a single zoning
administrator who makes the decision that that officer, uh,
the noticing that they do to the public is
that they just notice that a review is happening, which is
that application submitted.
We verify it's got everything it needs in order
to be decided upon.
We notice the public that a decision is about to be made.
It gives them the opportunity to participate, uh,
and weigh in before
that decision's made in case there's new
information that should come to light.
Uh, it also gives them an ample heads up in case
they wanted to file an appeal.
Um, we would institute the appeals process would be our
local planning board that they don't have to go through, um,
superior court and uh, that it would capture two
to four units in ADUs.
Um, we do recommend, uh,
and I'm curious if council's supportive
of seeing an ordinance that does this, that we try
to do some of this staff level review
for commercial developments as well.
Our ordinance currently says a thousand square feet
of new construction goes to the planning board.
It's a pretty low threshold.
Um, and our site standards are so robust and our review
before it gets to the planning board is really robust
as well staff's equipped to do this.
And I think in order to streamline projects
and get more commercial development going at lower cost, um,
we may be really interested
and staff wants to do this if you're supportive of, uh,
allow some commercial development to go
that staff route as well.
Um, can I ask a question?
If tomorrow we needed a zoning administrator,
do we have the person who would become that on staff now
or is that a new position?
Um, so we have been discussing this at length within,
you know, we have to submit budgets by Thursday.
Uh, so under this model there would be no new personnel.
Um, but we would need to reorg a little.
Thank you. Yes, Councillor Scott,
Can I ask a clarifying question on the first one?
Um, you ask if we wish
to standardize the minimum lock coverage
and should a more aggressive standard be enforced?
Sorry, can you clarify what you mean
by a more aggressive standard?
So typically we say that 20% of a site needs
to be reserved as open space
and lot coverage would say then if you wanted to, 80%
of the property could become buildings
and hardscape driveway pavement, whatever.
Um, if you were interested in, um,
creating small compact use as little land as possible to
but still get your four units approach, we could edge
that number higher and say, you know, 50% of the site has
to be open space and the remaining 50% is
where you get to do everything you need to do.
Um, you can get more aggressive with that standard,
just understand it's counterbalancing
reduction in open space loss, uh, with, you know,
more tendency towards duplexes.
You'd be less likely to be able
to put two detached single family homes
with their own dedicated driveways on.
Sorry, I I think I was confusing that
with the just maximum lot size or minimum lot size.
Okay. Thank you.
Would you like comments or are we
Still asking questions?
Yes, please. Sorry, I was trying to figure out
what my own feelings were there.
Are you ready to make comments?
Um, I think so, and I apologize
that these are not very specific.
Um, but I am generally, I, I am glad
that this legislation is in place and I think
although I appreciate the single family aesthetic
that we have built in South Portland, I think that a lot
of the, um, rules
and restrictions that we have set up have actually led
to our housing crisis.
Um, so I would sort of encourage us towards
less regulation, design review processes.
I think that the guidance
around a zoning administrator is the right approach
based on the options that you have outlined.
Um, and I don't currently believe
that we should have a more aggressive lot coverage.
I, I would like in the general, my general principle
and thought is to, um,
maybe deregulate is not a great word,
but sort of open up the opportunities for people
to maximize their lots, the housing opportunities
and have less, um,
less restrictions than we currently have.
That's helpful.
Yep.
I did you wanna add?
I agree. I would echo with
what counselor Scott said so eloquently.
Counselor Coleman,
I no, I, I agree.
And the restrictions in design, um,
because I don't see where I,
I really do like duplexes that separate,
I mean it provides noise buffer
'cause they usually have common rooms.
The bedrooms are off.
Um, it's a really good usage
Of space. So from
exterior
You I, it wouldn't it, it, i, it
to me it's like I don't understand the, all of the ones
that I've observed have been aesthetically pleasing.
Even if you, if it's quite visible
that it's a duplex Yes, yes. Or a more
Two, two family or if it was like the bungalow
that I thought was just one
and I just thought it was another entrance
and didn't realize until I knew the owner that that indoor
actually was like a foia.
Mm-hmm. And there was a stairs up
and then to the other two bedroom apartment on the bottom.
Um, baffled, I mean
'cause never saw two cars in the driveway at one time.
Oh, the mysteries The, my mystery.
Thank you. So yes.
Utilized the space and the design should be flexible.
And then I, I'm sorry if I didn't hear,
but um, the three of you reacting
to staff level review procedures? I support a
Zoning administrator. Yeah.
Okay. So,
and did you also support the staff recommendations?
Yes. Okay. Well I think we're finding some
remarkable similarity here.
I'm just going to jump on in 'cause I'm next.
Um, I think 20
to 30% lot coverage max is, does not need to be expanded.
I don't think we need to put a lot
of energy into single family character design controls.
Um, and I also support the staff level,
uh, review procedures as they have been presented.
Councilor pride,
I need a moment to think a little more about this.
Councilor West West,
Uh, I support the zoning administrator.
I support the right of appeal to the planning board instead
of having to go to court one.
This is not anything you've mentioned,
but it's bothered me for a long time.
I would really like to see a change
to our noticing requirements that we require notice
to be posted on the property when there's a pending thing
instead of the mailed notice.
I mean I know we have the mail notice to the 500 feet
and all that, but a lot
of times people don't know what that means.
They don't have any understanding of it.
And I know you're familiar with ways
that notice can be posted actually on the property.
So I just submit that as something to think about.
I'm sitting here working with our current zoning
and most of our properties are a and g
and with a, the 50 by 100 with a 20 foot
setback in the front yard
and the 20 foot setback in the back yard and the six foot
and a six foot, that means we're already required
to leave 2,720 feet of more than half of the lot
as as the setback.
And I, it's just gonna be how can anybody do this?
And then the maximum feet, the maximum, um, height is,
you know, it's only whatever it is here, it's 35 feet.
I just find it very interesting
that we're gonna, but it's fine with me.
Fine with me. Let's do it.
But we're gonna leave the setbacks the same in
the, in the A zone.
Right. I think in the G zone we should think of changing 'em
because we have 15 feet foot setbacks on both the side yards
and, but the G zone is gonna go down to a 5,000 square foot
lot with a 15 foot and 15 foot side yard setback.
How can you build much of anything then?
Don't, I mean, are you smiling 'cause you agree
or are you smiling because,
Uh, I'm smiling because I,
I find the G zone particularly weird.
Um, it, it's called our infill zone.
It's supposed to be our higher density zone. Yeah.
And it does everything it can to not allow, develop
Just storage that It has
an expanded parking requirement,
it has excessive setback requirements,
it has no height adjustments.
Yep. Uh, I, I don't know how it was conceived or designed,
but it's what we've got and I wasn't planning on touching it
until we had the comp plan, um, update.
Okay. Well just keep that in mind.
If I'm still around then it's fine with me to change
that setback in the G zone
If, if others are interested,
I would be curious if you'd welcome.
'cause I I'm, I would suggest, you know,
we just harmonize uh, the side setbacks, rear setbacks in G
to the aid district, which Yes.
Is sort of, it's like lesser dense cousin.
Um, but allows more arguably
And And if you're,
Yeah, because the effect of what we have now is
that our supposedly more dense zone
with these smaller lot size, it's gonna prohibit you
From building. I think I live
in that situation.
Um, but anyway, how historically my,
it was just a quick question.
Why did it get set up that way?
Is there something that we're not getting,
It's late so I'll be blunt.
I think people were freaked out about additional
development, additional
Scale. Ah,
so
Anything biggers required Freaking out.
Excessive standard. Huh. Interesting.
So I don't think we can change that right this second.
It sounds like Councilor West, you've asked Ma to keep
that in mind as something
we would look at in the future. Yeah.
Alright. But thanks for the very good job
and good presentation tonight.
It's pretty interesting to think about how
this would all is all gonna work from a
practical point of view
Counselor pride.
So as this is a workshop about housing development
updates, I think if we give long direction to come forward
to us with an ordinance
that results in g having the same setbacks
as a, I think he can do that.
And so I would encourage that to happen.
Um, and you know, I I think I agree
with Councilor West, you know, I think we move forward.
I I'll agree with the rest of the council and,
and, um, we should move, move forward and not,
and not have um, not be too aggressive.
Um, and, and do everything we can to encourage density.
I've always been in favor of density
and I think, um, hopefully you can interpret that as,
as answers to one and two.
Uh, to an, to the extent that I think that, um, I, I'm okay
with the multifamily look.
Uh, I don't necessarily,
we don't necessarily need to adjust that.
Um, and then, you know, number three,
I'm always sort of cautious about having things bypass
public, um, process.
But at the same time I like efficiency
and I like, um,
And I do, you know, remember a time not
that long ago when we were being somewhat criticized for,
uh, taking forever to get through licensing
and regulation in order to get, um,
your building permits and stuff.
Um, so, you know, I
I feel like we can move forward with um,
at least something less restrictive than,
I dunno if that gives you your answer.
Um, maybe I need a little more of that discussion of
what those different processes look like.
Um, but I think the middle one
come forward with the middle one that that's more, you know,
the same amount of sort of less than full
planning board review, but more than diminish mis review
by a single staff member.
I kind of like the staff committee idea.
Um, though at the same time I'm cognizant of
that taking up a lot more staff time
and finding a time for staff to meet.
So I sort of, I'm struggling with this one
so maybe get whatever,
whatever the rest of the council says,
It's fine if I can just offer on that point.
'cause we did discuss
and kind of maybe started as a middle ground
as a staff committee thing.
Um, and the only reason I I really push to not go
that route is because our review process is
that it's not just three or four
or five selected directors that weigh in.
It's all of the directors and department heads
and everyone has to provide their comments
and that's part of the record
and that has to be part of the decision making.
So if we get something from the police chief
or fire chief, if I do it by email in advance
of the meeting, I have their input.
Um, yes. They don't technically have a vo a vote.
Um, but I think if I'm ignoring a safety comment from police
or fire, I think I should be fired myself.
Right. You know what I mean? Like
that there's a different issue there than um,
you know, what the vote was.
So anyway, um, that's why we kind of deviated
and went with a more single person.
Yeah. Thank you for that. That was helpful.
And I guess I would leave that way too.
I'm sure if it doesn't work out
for a couple people, we'll hear about it
And there'd be an appeal uh, to a local board.
Yeah. Okay.
Sounds like you do have what you need for now, Milan.
Well I have two in favor of the, of uh, G updates
to match a on on setbacks.
Um, if I can at least just get two others.
'cause I think we need four for guidance to move forward,
but otherwise it's clear on the rest of the questions.
Yeah. Did he get four on this?
Yes. No, it was just those two.
I think we're in favor of the GA
Because Counselor West brought
Up go on on our newbie.
Yeah, I am indefinitely in favor of that.
Okay. Sounds like unanimous for that as well.
I am as well. Can I add a question? Sure.
A workshop we can go on. We are
Going, given that we are going
through the comprehensive plan work
and that there will be a lot of other updates, I guess
beyond just the G to a, I assume
that there will be an opportunity for additional
augmentation, which is a very subjective word of,
of various zoning changes that can happen
and can happen on sort of a more, um, nuanced
and sort of surgical level across the city
towards this effort.
So thank you for confirming my sort of question,
comment. I'm in favor of this
Nice hybrid.
Okay. So now do you have what you need?
Yes, I do intend
because I heard, uh, support for staff's recommendation
and we did include that piece about commercial.
It's going to be a very limited number
of words in the ordinance.
So when we present you with an ordinance,
if you in fact later, 'cause
we didn't spend a lot of time with it.
Mm-hmm. If you're not comfortable with that approach,
we can simply strike it and it's a really easy edit.
So I'd suggest we don't workshop that anymore.
We'll bring you forward what that looks like.
Thank you for calling that out. Take
It from there. Yeah.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very much.
That would be you a good thing. Thank you Molan. Okay.
That so ends the workshop part of our meeting today.
Is there anyone who did not speak in our first open citizen
comment Who would like to speak now?
I have a quite, I think there was someone in the public
that wanted I'm gonna, yeah.
If there, if the person, I
Don't see a hand, I see a person's there,
but I don't see a hand raised the
Voice. I think maybe their
mute came off
for a moment. Yes. Yeah, there we
Go. Yeah.
So we do
and we can uh, if you can unmute yourself.
Uh, Claire Holman, go ahead.
Hi. Sorry I, I couldn't come earlier
and I couldn't come in person,
but, um, I, I actually had a couple
and I couldn't, I I couldn't get led into the meeting when
I, earlier when there was questions for Milan.
So this means I can't ask him any questions now. Right.
You can ask the city manager a question.
Okay. Because what, what I heard Milan said something
about tightening that we might, we might need
to do some tightening up on short term rentals.
I'd love to hear more about that.
And um, uh, and I just wanna say,
and I also wonder if we're looking at 10% growth,
that's like, is that like per over, what amount of time is
that 10% per how much and where, like where do we end up?
Where does that go eventually?
Is that like 10% this year and 10% next year
and 10% the year after?
Is there a time when we ever don't try to get 10%?
I just wonder where that really goes.
Um, I probably didn't hear it right.
I I heard the big, the part that I started on was in my car.
It's harder to listen. And then, um, uh,
my other question is what about actual trees?
I don't mean like decorative,
like tiny little tea look like crab trees, like the ones
that were put, um, on Westbrook Street in front of
that new building, new housing, there's like just tiny,
tiny little things that won't give any shade.
But like what about like New England tree line
shade line streets?
Is that, are we thinking about that at all?
That, especially when we consider
that we're having hotter years?
Shouldn't we, shouldn't all of our development also try
and foster trees,
which will bring us oxygen in shade, like real trees?
Not as I said, those teeny decorative things that you see
that don't really do much and also die quickly.
So, um, that's, those are my questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, did you get two
or three questions out of that?
I got three. And, okay,
So first one, uh, Milan, uh,
you talked about short-term rental tightening.
What did you mean by that?
Uh, I think I was just speaking
to Councilor West comment earlier that we
have received some complaints
or she's received some complaints
and we need to be, uh, looking at short-term rentals.
So I'd be looking at council's guidance on whether we
wanna do something there.
I don't have any prescriptive thing in mind.
Um, we haven't really been assigned that yet.
But if there is a concern and you can look at it,
Uh, and then 10% growth, what's the timeframe
to get to that 10%?
So it was, uh, uh, it's not a 10% growth rate.
It's saying, um, for all the properties
that currently only require a single family home,
if we enable them to be two threes and fours
and we had 10% of those properties that can now no longer
just be single families,
but they can get an additional unit in there
that would achieve our housing demand.
Um, so it's not a growth rate, it's just a
how many properties we have.
If 10% added an extra unit, it's not the, um,
Sustain. So 10%
sustainable of what we currently have
with one extra unit would get us to the goal of 2,600
or 28, 2300.
Right. Okay. Is there a timeframe
For that? 'cause I feel
like the goal is a moving goal. Moving
Our goal, uh, that we've adopted is a 2030 goal,
but it was, remember we leaned into rental just
in terms of the housing study.
What they found is a, the hugest gap was, um,
in the four ownership affordable housing piece.
So if somebody built a small single family attached
to their single family and sold it
for significantly less than
what you typically sell a single family for,
and suddenly it's a condo that was never gonna be built, um,
that would directly impact that desperate need that we have.
So, and it's, it's not gonna, it's not a sustained thing
that would get us up to where our demand is.
I guess the last question was, are actual trees as opposed
to decorative type trees, considered as part of developments
or, or I guess probably is it since this is about housing,
housing developments.
So we have a tree ordinance, we would just continue
to enforce the tree ordinance.
It does allow a small number of trees to be removed.
If the council wanted, um,
we can adopt some more aggressive tree standards
or a tree planting requirement.
For example, Portland requires street tree planting when
you do development.
Um, that is something
that we didn't look at specifically tied
to these housing amendments.
If counsel wants that, we
can look at that in its own course.
But my que is it the housing amendment that we'd like
to do that or is it within the tree ordinance that we
Right, that's, you can make it as part of the housing.
So if you're gonna say that we're gonna have, you know,
significantly more units being built
and maybe some additional driveways, maybe
that results in more impervious area.
And I think the caller spoke to heat island,
so we see some correlation there.
So when we do this housing thing, we also want
to touch up the tree ordinance.
The amendment would be in the,
presumably in the tree ordinance.
Um, but it depends on what you'd like to see.
The tree ordinance currently does not prescribe street
tree planting, for instance.
It just says if you take trees
out, you have to replace them.
So if you happen to have a lot with no trees on it,
you can build something in our current ordinance really
wouldn't obligate you for anything.
If on principle we wanted
to say new housing means new impervious,
therefore you must plant a tree.
Whether or not you have delete a tree is irrelevant.
That's a different thing
and probably still throw it into the tree ordinance section
'cause of simplicity.
But we would need that guidance from you.
Um, does everyone understand what Milan is saying? Yeah.
And are we prepared right this moment
to give him a little guidance on whether we'd like to see
something coming back that requires basically get,
requires more trees being planted in the city
when there's development?
Not to interject, but just so you're aware,
the coastal resilience overlay zone that we're doing
that deals everyone's been talking about it
is a flood piece.
It's that, but we also have a heat island
mitigation component to it.
Yeah. And so we are tackling heat islands, um,
which are concentrated in the Mill Creek downtown
and the main mall area because of the seas of asphalt.
Uh, and that's where the need is.
But the heat island has,
it's been mapped in South Portland isn't really happening
in our single family areas.
There's quite a bit of tree canopy there.
So Milan are, um, on February 10th,
we're having the coastal resilience overlay workshop.
Is this something to bring back up then if a
counselor wants to bring it back up?
Certainly we will be talking about heat islands. Okay.
I, I just want you all to be aware, we're talking
of tripping the heat island mitigation requirement at, uh,
parking lots where 20 spaces or more are required
or significant square footage of, uh, building surface.
So I think the caller was thinking more in terms
of this like 1, 2, 3 unit context.
Mm-hmm. You know, spoiler, we're not touching
that under the heat island piece.
So if you want trees, that's a different matter.
You can speak to it then, but we'll need guidance on it.
Okay. Help. When is this subject better discussed?
If the council wants to discuss it? Counselor Scott.
I, I would also say,
and I, I'm, I sort of am concerned about throwing too many
ingredients into this current soup recipe that in
implementing the comprehensive plan
and um, re-looking at zoning ordinance, that
that might be the best place to consider, um,
updating a tree ordinance or some sort of development work.
I, I don't know that with the current information,
this would be the best place to bring
that into the discussion.
Although I very much appreciate the trees
and I've lost several in my neighborhood
that I'm very sad about, so.
Mm-hmm. Um, that's my thought.
I would second that I, I,
when we started talking about setbacks, I kind of started
to lose the plot because I'm not as familiar with zoning as,
as some of my peers on the council are.
And now we're getting into trees.
I just, we are, we are, we are vastly
or quickly over overing looks.
My, my skillset.
I, I, yes, councilor.
I would also say that I think there's a lot that the city
can do and I believe a, a tree fund that's there
to help support trees in the public right of ways
and other areas and I think that we should foster that.
And again, to not put it on the burden of the individual
developer a lot
and allow for more housing opportunity,
the city can do a lot in that area.
So
Anyone on this side have anything they wanna add?
No. Sounds like you're getting a, we'd like to punt
and yet we don't want to forget that trees are part
of resilience planning and we won't forget that
and we'll bring trees back.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, is there anyone who didn't, oh,
we already, or have some speak.
Sorry, I lost track of the plot.
Um, anyone else who'd like to speak for citizen discussion?
Who is online? Okay. No.
So with that citizen discussion, part two is now closed.
Do we have communication from our city manager?
I'll pass this evening. Oh, well, um,
we are on round robin counselors, um,
counselor West.
Do you have a round robin item
Or, uh, yes.
I, I do, I I do wanna say to the community,
and I know a lot of people are on edge about ice,
and we've heard about that tonight
and I think we got some good guidance from our staff.
The thing that was on my mind on, uh,
round robin tonight is there was an excellent article in
today's Press Herald about the projects
that are being funded with the state trail bond fund.
And it occurred to me, course this is something
that's dear my heart, that, uh, when I,
and I know there are a number of things that are under
review for possible application by the city,
but the trail that goes out from the end of de
to Fisherman's Point could be an ideal project for
that trail bond fund,
because to make that accessible
for disabled people would be a really important
goal that could be met.
And it's, they wanna fund a lot
of small projects in a lot of different places.
So it's a, would be a small project with a big return
because there are so many people that want to walk out there
and look at the view.
And because we, they're concerned about resiliency
because we lost the shacks,
it seems like we could make a very good argument about
resiliency on that little point.
And so I'd be glad to talk
to staff in more detail if anybody is interested
or wants to think of that as a possible idea to follow up
for the applications this year.
Thank you. Councilor West. Councilor Pride.
Did you have a round robin item or item tens? I'll pass.
Thank you. Councilor Pride. Councilor Coleman.
I'm passing tonight.
Thank you. Everybody's tired. Councilor Walker.
I don't have anything prepared,
but I do want to echo a lot of comments made
by community members and, um,
our fellow counselors and staff tonight.
Just that my heart is very heavy as to where we are
as a community and I am so proud
of the makeup of our community from, you know,
longstanding Mainers to New Mainers.
You know, I, I think that's one of the things
that I really enjoy so much about living in South Portland.
And I'm just aghast at where we are right now as a society.
And I wish I had like strong directive,
active words to say, but I just, yeah.
Thank you Counselor Scott.
Um, thank you Mayor Tipton.
Uh, I would like to recognize that yesterday was, uh,
Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, and I was thinking a lot about him
and his work
and in a time when I think there is a lot of, uh, fear
and sadness and concern about where our country is going,
I, um, still believe that we need
to have hope and have dreams.
And I hope everyone listens to his speech again
as I made my children do.
Um, and think about your neighbors and why you're here
and, um, have peace
and hope and dreams.
Thank you Counselor Scott.
Um, I will also take a moment,
probably not to anyone's shock.
Um, the first thing I wanted
to do is thank my fellow counselors very deeply.
I have calculated that in the first three weeks here
of January, um, we've spent 17 hours
in meetings and that does not include reading email
and reading staff memos and doing research
and talking to people to prepare for the meetings.
Um, we have jobs, we have families, we have children.
And thank you very, very much.
You are certainly public servants. Thank you.
Um, and then I just, it breaks my heart
and it is, makes me so angry to think
that we had our school board chair here today telling us
that they have decided to cancel a meeting that we know
they have been planning for, for
at least six weeks, probably longer.
Um, an important meeting
to solicit information from the community about
how the community feels about potential cost saving
measures in our schools.
And they have had to cancel this
because members, the families who are members
of the school community feel legitimately fearful
about attending a meeting
that affects their children's lives
and their entire community.
That is not the, uh, ideals
of the American way that I feel when
I pledge allegiance to the flag in this council chamber.
I, I think it is just
beyond deeply disturbing.
I would encourage our residents to reach out to your
neighbors, all of your neighbors.
We should all do that at all times.
See how you can support one another.
And I would also say to our residents, if you are moved
to participate in peaceful protesting that
you feel is going to make a difference, do so.
And that's what I have to say this evening.
Thank you very much. Can we have a motion to adjourn?
Counselor Pride Seconded by Counselor Walker.
I'm going to make the assumption that it is a unanimous
to adjourn.